['A merry Christmas, uncle! God save you!', 'Bah! Humbug!', "Christmas a humbug, uncle! You don't mean that, I am sure?", "I do, Merry Christmas! What right have you to be merry? What reason have you to be merry? You're poor enough.", "Come, then, What right have you to be dismal? What reason have you to be morose? You're rich enough.", 'Bah! Humbug!', "Don't be cross, uncle!", "What else can I be, when I live in such a world of fools as this? Merry Christmas! Out upon merry Christmas! What's Christmas-time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time for finding yourself a year older, and not an hour richer; a time for balancing your books, and having every item in 'em through a round dozen of months presented dead against you? If I could work my will, every idiot who goes about with 'Merry Christmas' on his lips should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart. He should!", 'Uncle!', 'Nephew! keep Christmas in your own way, and let me keep it in mine.', "Keep it! But you don't keep it.", 'Let me leave it alone, then, Much good may it do you! Much good it has ever done you!', 'There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I have not profited, I dare say, Christmas among the rest. But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas-time, when it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that--as a good time; a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time; the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures bound on other journeys. And therefore, uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it _has_ done me good, and _will_ do me good; and I say, God bless it!', "Let me hear another sound from _you_, and you'll keep your Christmas by losing your situation! You're quite a powerful speaker, sir, I wonder you don't go into Parliament.", "Don't be angry, uncle. Come! Dine with us to-morrow.", 'But why? Why?', 'Why did you get married?', 'Because I fell in love.', 'Because you fell in love! Good afternoon!', 'Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened. Why give it as a reason for not coming now?', 'Good afternoon,', 'I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why cannot we be friends?', 'Good afternoon!', "I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute. We have never had any quarrel to which I have been a party. But I have made the trial in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humour to the last. So A Merry Christmas, uncle!", 'Good afternoon,', 'And A Happy New Year!', 'Good afternoon!', "There's another fellow, my clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking about a merry Christmas. I'll retire to Bedlam.", "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe, Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. Scrooge, or Mr. Marley?", 'Mr. Marley has been dead these seven years, He died seven years ago, this very night.', 'We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving partner,', 'At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge, it is more than usually desirable that we should make some slight provision for the poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at the present time. Many thousands are in want of common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir.', 'Are there no prisons?', 'Plenty of prisons,', 'And the Union workhouses? Are they still in operation?', 'They are. Still, I wish I could say they were not.', 'The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigour, then?', 'Both very busy, sir.', 'Oh! I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had occurred to stop them in their useful course, I am very glad to hear it.', 'Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind or body to the multitude, a few of us are endeavouring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink, and means of warmth. We choose this time, because it is a time, of all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices. What shall I put you down for?', 'Nothing!', 'You wish to be anonymous?', "I wish to be left alone, Since you ask me what I wish, gentlemen, that is my answer. I don't make merry myself at Christmas, and I can't afford to make idle people merry. I help to support the establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough; and those who are badly off must go there.", "Many can't go there; and many would rather die.", "If they would rather die, they had better do it, and decrease the surplus population. Besides--excuse me--I don't know that.", 'But you might know it,', "It's not my business, It's enough for a man to understand his own business, and not to interfere with other people's. Mine occupies me constantly. Good afternoon, gentlemen!", "You'll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?", 'If quite convenient, sir.', "It's not convenient, and it's not fair. If I was to stop half-a-crown for it, you'd think yourself ill used, I'll be bound?", "And yet, you don't think _me_ ill used when I pay a day's wages for no work.", "A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of December! But I suppose you must have the whole day. Be here all the earlier next morning.", 'Humbug!', "It's humbug still! I won't believe it.", 'How now! What do you want with me?', 'Much!', 'Who are you?', 'Ask me who I _was_.', "Who _were_ you, then? You're particular, for a shade. _to_ a shade,", 'In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley.', 'Can you--can you sit down?', 'I can.', 'Do it, then.', "You don't believe in me,", "I don't,", 'What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your own senses?', "I don't know,", 'Why do you doubt your senses?', "Because, a little thing affects them. A slight disorder of the stomach makes them cheats. You may be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato. There's more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!", 'You see this toothpick?', 'I do,', 'You are not looking at it,', 'But I see it, notwithstanding.', 'Well! I have but to swallow this, and be for the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins, all of my own creation. Humbug, I tell you; humbug!', 'Mercy! Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?', 'Man of the worldly mind! do you believe in me or not?', 'I do, I must. But why do spirits walk the earth, and why do they come to me?', 'It is required of every man, that the spirit within him should walk abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far and wide; and, if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do so after death. It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe is me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!', 'You are fettered, Tell me why?', 'I wear the chain I forged in life, I made it link by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free-will, and of my own free-will I wore it. Is its pattern strange to _you_?', 'Or would you know, the weight and length of the strong coil you bear yourself? It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven Christmas-eves ago. You have laboured on it since. It is a ponderous chain!', 'Jacob! Old Jacob Marley, tell me more! Speak comfort to me, Jacob!', 'I have none to give, It comes from other regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of men. Nor can I tell you what I would. A very little more is all permitted to me. I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere. My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me;--in life my spirit never roved beyond the narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie before me!', 'You must have been very slow about it, Jacob,', 'Slow!', 'Seven years dead, And travelling all the time?', 'The whole time, No rest, no peace. Incessant torture of remorse.', 'You travel fast?', 'On the wings of the wind,', 'You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years,', "Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed, not to know that ages of incessant labour, by immortal creatures, for this earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is susceptible is all developed! Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness! Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's opportunities misused! Yet such was I! Oh, such was I!", 'But you were always a good man of business, Jacob,', 'Business! Mankind was my business. The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence were, all, my business. The dealings of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my business!', 'At this time of the rolling year, I suffer most. Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise Men to a poor abode? Were there no poor homes to which its light would have conducted _me_?', 'Hear me! My time is nearly gone.', "I will, But don't be hard upon me! Don't be flowery, Jacob! Pray!", 'How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I may not tell. I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day.', 'That is no light part of my penance, I am here to-night to warn you that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my fate. A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer.', 'You were always a good friend to me, Thankee!', 'You will be haunted, by Three Spirits.', 'Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob?', 'It is.', "I--I think I'd rather not,", 'Without their visits, you cannot hope to shun the path I tread. Expect the first to-morrow when the bell tolls One.', "Couldn't I take 'em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?", 'Expect the second on the next night at the same hour. The third, upon the next night when the last stroke of Twelve has ceased to vibrate. Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake, you remember what has passed between us!', "Why, it isn't possible, that I can have slept through a whole day and far into another night. It isn't possible that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!", 'Ding, dong!', 'A quarter past,', 'Ding, dong!', 'Half past,', 'Ding, dong!', 'A quarter to it,', 'Ding, dong!', 'The hour itself, and nothing else!', 'Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?', 'I am!', 'Who and what are you?', 'I am the Ghost of Christmas Past.', 'Long Past?', 'No. Your past.', 'What! would you so soon put out, with worldly hands, the light I give? Is it not enough that you are one of those whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of years to wear it low upon my brow?', 'Your welfare!', 'Your reclamation, then. Take heed!', 'Rise! and walk with me!', 'I am a mortal, and liable to fall.', 'Bear but a touch of my hand _there_, and you shall be upheld in more than this!', 'Good Heaven! I was bred in this place. I was a boy here!', 'Your lip is trembling, And what is that upon your cheek?', 'You recollect the way?', 'Remember it! I could walk it blindfold.', 'Strange to have forgotten it for so many years! Let us go on.', 'Let us go on.', 'These are but shadows of the things that have been, They have no consciousness of us.', 'They have no consciousness of us.', 'The school is not quite deserted, A solitary child, neglected by his friends, is left there still.', "Why, it's Ali Baba! It's dear old honest Ali Baba! Yes, yes, I know. One Christmas-time when yonder solitary child was left here all alone, he _did_ come, for the first time, just like that. Poor boy! And Valentine, and his wild brother, Orson; there they go! And what's his name, who was put down in his drawers, asleep, at the gate of Damascus; don't you see him? And the Sultan's Groom turned upside down by the Genii: there he is upon his head! Serve him right! I'm glad of it. What business had _he_ to be married to the Princess?", "It's dear old honest Ali Baba.", "There's the Parrot! Green body and yellow tail, with a thing like a lettuce growing out of the top of his head; there he is! Poor Robin Crusoe he called him, when he came home again after sailing round the island. 'Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you been, Robin Crusoe?' The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't. It was the Parrot, you know. There goes Friday, running for his life to the little creek! Halloa! Hoop! Halloo!", "I wish, but it's too late now.", 'What is the matter?', "Nothing, Nothing. There was a boy singing a Christmas Carol at my door last night. I should like to have given him something: that's all.", 'Let us see another Christmas!', 'I have come to bring you home, dear brother! To bring you home, home, home!', 'Home, little Fan?', "Yes! Home for good and all. Home for ever and ever. Father is so much kinder than he used to be, that home's like Heaven! He spoke so gently to me one dear night when I was going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more if you might come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a coach to bring you. And you're to be a man! and are never to come back here; but first we're to be together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all the world.", 'You are quite a woman, little Fan!', 'something', 'Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered, But she had a large heart!', "So she had, You're right. I will not gainsay it, Spirit. God forbid!", 'She died a woman, and had, as I think, children.', 'One child,', 'True, Your nephew!', 'Know it! Was I apprenticed here?', "Why, it's old Fezziwig! Bless his heart, it's Fezziwig alive again!", 'Yo ho, there! Ebenezer! Dick!', 'Dick Wilkins, to be sure! Bless me, yes. There he is. He was very much attached to me, was Dick. Poor Dick! Dear, dear!', "Yo ho, my boys! No more work to-night. Christmas-eve, Dick. Christmas, Ebenezer! Let's have the shutters up, before a man can say Jack Robinson!", "Hilli-ho! Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room here! Hilli-ho, Dick! Chirrup, Ebenezer!", 'A small matter, to make these silly folks so full of gratitude.', 'Small!', 'Why! Is it not? He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal money: three or four, perhaps. Is that so much that he deserves this praise?', "It isn't that, It isn't that, Spirit. He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil. Say that his power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant that it is impossible to add and count 'em up: what then? The happiness he gives is quite as great as if it cost a fortune.", 'What is the matter?', 'Nothing particular,', 'Something, I think?', "No, no. I should like to be able to say a word or two to my clerk just now. That's all.", 'My time grows short, Quick!', 'It matters little, To you, very little. Another idol has displaced me; and, if it can cheer and comfort you in time to come as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to grieve.', 'What Idol has displaced you?', 'A golden one.', 'This is the even-handed dealing of the world! There is nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!', 'You fear the world too much, All your other hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid reproach. I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by one, until the master passion, Gain, engrosses you. Have I not?', 'What then? Even if I have grown so much wiser, what then? I am not changed towards you.', 'Am I?', 'Our contract is an old one. It was made when we were both poor, and content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly fortune by our patient industry. You _are_ changed. When it was made you were another man.', 'I was a boy,', 'Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are, I am. That which promised happiness when we were one in heart is fraught with misery now that we are two. How often and how keenly I have thought of this I will not say. It is enough that I _have_ thought of it, and can release you.', 'Have I ever sought release?', 'In words. No. Never.', 'In what, then?', 'In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of life; another Hope as its great end. In everything that made my love of any worth or value in your sight. If this had never been between us, tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now? Ah, no!', 'I would gladly think otherwise if I could, Heaven knows! When _I_ have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong and irresistible it must be. But if you were free to-day, to-morrow, yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance and regret would surely follow? I do; and I release you. With a full heart, for the love of him you once were.', 'You may--the memory of what is past half makes me hope you will--have pain in this. A very, very brief time, and you will dismiss the recollection of it gladly, as an unprofitable dream, from which it happened well that you awoke. May you be happy in the life you have chosen!', 'Spirit! show me no more! Conduct me home. Why do you delight to torture me?', 'One shadow more!', "No more! No more! I don't wish to see it. Show me no more!", 'Belle, I saw an old friend of yours this afternoon.', 'Who was it?', 'Guess!', "How can I? Tut, don't I know? Mr. Scrooge.", 'Mr. Scrooge it was. I passed his office window; and as it was not shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing him. His partner lies upon the point of death, I hear; and there he sat alone. Quite alone in the world, I do believe.', 'Spirit! remove me from this place.', 'I told you these were shadows of the things that have been, That they are what they are, do not blame me!', 'Remove me! I cannot bear it!', 'Leave me! Take me back! Haunt me no longer!', 'Come in! Come in! and know me better, man!', 'I am the Ghost of Christmas Present, Look upon me!', 'You have never seen the like of me before!', 'Never,', 'Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family; meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later years?', "I don't think I have, I am afraid I have not. Have you had many brothers, Spirit?", 'More than eighteen hundred,', 'A tremendous family to provide for,', 'Spirit, conduct me where you will. I went forth last night on compulsion, and I learnt a lesson which is working now. To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit by it.', 'Touch my robe!', 'Is there a peculiar flavour in what you sprinkle from your torch?', 'There is. My own.', 'Would it apply to any kind of dinner on this day?', 'To any kindly given. To a poor one most.', 'Why to a poor one most?', 'Because it needs it most.', "Spirit! I wonder you, of all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp these people's opportunities of innocent enjoyment.", 'I!', "You would deprive them of their means of dining every seventh day, often the only day on which they can be said to dine at all, wouldn't you?", 'I!', 'You seek to close these places on the Seventh Day, And it comes to the same thing.', '_I_ seek!', 'Forgive me if I am wrong. It has been done in your name, or at least in that of your family,', 'There are some upon this earth of yours, who lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride, ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are as strange to us, and all our kith and kin, as if they had never lived. Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us.', "What has ever got your precious father, then? And your brother, Tiny Tim? And Martha warn't as late last Christmas-day by half an hour!", "Here's Martha, mother!", "Here's Martha, mother! Hurrah! There's _such_ a goose, Martha!", 'Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!', "We'd a deal of work to finish up last night, and had to clear away this morning, mother!", 'Well! never mind so long as you are come, Sit ye down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, Lord bless ye!', "No, no! There's father coming, Hide, Martha, hide!", "Why, where's our Martha?", 'Not coming,', 'Not coming! Not coming upon Christmas-day!', 'And how did little Tim behave?', 'As good as gold, and better. Somehow, he gets thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever heard. He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas-day who made lame beggars walk and blind men see.', 'A merry Christmas to us all, my dears. God bless us!', 'God bless us every one!', 'Spirit, tell me if Tiny Tim will live.', 'I see a vacant seat, in the poor chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved. If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, the child will die.', 'No, no, Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared.', 'If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, none other of my race, will find him here. What then? If he be like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population.', "Man, if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and Where it is. Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall die? It may be that, in the sight of Heaven, you are more worthless and less fit to live than millions like this poor man's child. Oh God! to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life among his hungry brothers in the dust!", "Mr. Scrooge! I'll give you Mr. Scrooge, the Founder of the Feast!", "The Founder of the Feast, indeed! I wish I had him here. I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast upon, and I hope he'd have a good appetite for it.", 'My dear, the children! Christmas-day.', 'It should be Christmas-day, I am sure, on which one drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as Mr. Scrooge. You know he is, Robert! Nobody knows it better than you do, poor fellow!', 'My dear! Christmas-day.', "I'll drink his health for your sake and the Day's, not for his. Long life to him! A merry Christmas and a happy New Year! He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!", "not for his. Long life to him! A merry Christmas and a happy New Year! He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!", 'was much about as tall as Peter', 'What place is this?', 'A place where Miners live, who labour in the bowels of the earth, But they know me. See!', 'Ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha!', 'Ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha, ha!', 'He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live! He believed it, too!', 'More shame for him, Fred!', "He's a comical old fellow, that's the truth; and not so pleasant as he might be. However, his offences carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him.", "I'm sure he is very rich, Fred, At least, you always tell _me_ so.", "What of that, my dear? His wealth is of no use to him. He don't do any good with it. He don't make himself comfortable with it. He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha, ha!--that he is ever going to benefit Us with it.", 'I have no patience with him,', "Oh, I have! I am sorry for him; I couldn't be angry with him if I tried. Who suffers by his ill whims? Himself always. Here he takes it into his head to dislike us, and he won't come and dine with us. What's the consequence? He don't lose much of a dinner.", 'Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner,', "Well! I am very glad to hear it, because I haven't any great faith in these young housekeepers. What do _you_ say, Topper?", 'Do go on, Fred, He never finishes what he begins to say! He is such a ridiculous fellow!', "I was only going to say, that the consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could do him no harm. I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can find in his own thoughts, either in his mouldy old office or his dusty chambers. I mean to give him the same chance every year, whether he likes it or not, for I pity him. He may rail at Christmas till he dies, but he can't help thinking better of it--I defy him--if he finds me going there in good temper, year after year, and saying, 'Uncle Scrooge, how are you?' If it only puts him in the vein to leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, _that's_ something; and I think I shook him yesterday.", 'Here is a new game, One half-hour, Spirit, only one!', 'I have found it out! I know what it is, Fred! I know what it is!', 'What is it?', "It's your uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge!", 'Yes', "He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure, and it would be ungrateful not to drink his health. Here is a glass of mulled wine ready to our hand at the moment; and I say, 'Uncle Scrooge!'", 'Well! Uncle Scrooge!', "A merry Christmas and a happy New Year to the old man, whatever he is! He wouldn't take it from me, but may he have it nevertheless. Uncle Scrooge!", "Are spirits' lives so short?", 'My life upon this globe is very brief, It ends to-night.', 'To-night!', 'To-night at midnight. Hark! The time is drawing near.', 'Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask, but I see something strange, and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts. Is it a foot or a claw?', 'It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it, Look here.', 'Oh, Man! look here! Look, look, down here!', 'Spirit! are they yours?', "They are Man's, And they cling to me, appealing from their fathers. This boy is Ignorance. This girl is Want. Beware of them both, and all of their degree, but most of all beware this boy, for on his brow I see that written which is Doom, unless the writing be erased. Deny it! Slander those who tell it ye! Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse! And bide the end!", 'Have they no refuge or resource?', 'Are there no prisons? Are there no workhouses?', 'I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come?', 'You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not happened, but will happen in the time before us, Is that so, Spirit?', 'Ghost of the Future! I fear you more than any spectre I have seen. But, as I know your purpose is to do me good, and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart. Will you not speak to me?', 'Lead on! Lead on! The night is waning fast, and it is precious time to me, I know. Lead on, Spirit!', "No, I don't know much about it either way. I only know he's dead.", 'When did he die?', 'Last night, I believe.', "Why, what was the matter with him? I thought he'd never die.", 'God knows,', 'What has he done with his money?', "I haven't heard, Left it to his company, perhaps. He hasn't left it to _me_. That's all I know.", "Left it to his company, perhaps. He hasn't left it to _me_. That's all I know.", "It's likely to be a very cheap funeral, for, upon my life, I don't know of anybody to go to it. Suppose we make up a party, and volunteer?", "I don't mind going if a lunch is provided, But I must be fed if I make one.", "Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all, for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch. But I'll offer to go if anybody else will. When I come to think of it, I'm not at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for we used to stop and speak whenever we met. Bye, bye!", 'How are you?', 'How are you?', 'Well! Old Scratch has got his own at last, hey?', "So I am told, Cold, isn't it?", 'Seasonable for Christmas-time. You are not a skater, I suppose?', 'No. No. Something else to think of. Good morning!', "Let the charwoman alone to be the first! Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the undertaker's man alone to be the third. Look here, old Joe, here's a chance! If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!", "You couldn't have met in a better place, Come into the parlour. You were made free of it long ago, you know; and the other two an't strangers. Stop till I shut the door of the shop. Ah! How it skreeks! There an't such a rusty bit of metal in the place as its own hinges, I believe; and I'm sure there's no such old bones here as mine. Ha! ha! We're all suitable to our calling, we're well matched. Come into the parlour. Come into the parlour.", 'What odds, then? What odds, Mrs. Dilber? Every person has a right to take care of themselves. _He_ always did!', "That's true, indeed! No man more so.", "Why, then, don't stand staring as if you was afraid, woman! Who's the wiser? We're not going to pick holes in each other's coats, I suppose?", 'No, indeed! We should hope not.', "Very well, then! That's enough. Who's the worse for the loss of a few things like these? Not a dead man, I suppose?", 'No, indeed,', "If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw, why wasn't he natural in his lifetime? If he had been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by himself.", "It's the truest word that ever was spoke, It's a judgment on him.", "I wish it was a little heavier judgment, and it should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my hands on anything else. Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know the value of it. Speak out plain. I'm not afraid to be the first, nor afraid for them to see it. We knew pretty well that we were helping ourselves before we met here, I believe. It's no sin. Open the bundle, Joe.", "That's your account, and I wouldn't give another sixpence, if I was to be boiled for not doing it. Who's next?", "I always give too much to ladies. It's a weakness of mine, and that's the way I ruin myself, That's your account. If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd repent of being so liberal, and knock off half-a-crown.", 'And now undo _my_ bundle, Joe,', 'What do you call this? Bed-curtains?', 'Ah! Bed-curtains!', "You don't mean to say you took 'em down, rings and all, with him lying there?", 'Yes, I do, Why not?', "You were born to make your fortune, and you'll certainly do it.", "I certainly shan't hold my hand, when I can get anything in it by reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you, Joe, Don't drop that oil upon the blankets, now.", 'His blankets?', "Whose else's do you think? He isn't likely to take cold without 'em, I dare say.", "I hope he didn't die of anything catching? Eh?", "Don't you be afraid of that, I an't so fond of his company that I'd loiter about him for such things, if he did. Ah! You may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you won't find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place. It's the best he had, and a fine one too. They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been for me.", 'What do you call wasting of it?', "Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure, Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off again. If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good enough for anything. It's quite as becoming to the body. He can't look uglier than he did in that one.", 'Ha, ha! This is the end of it, you see! He frightened every one away from him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead! Ha, ha, ha!', 'Spirit! I see, I see. The case of this unhappy man might be my own. My life tends that way now. Merciful Heaven, what is this?', 'Spirit! this is a fearful place. In leaving it, I shall not leave its lesson, trust me. Let us go!', 'I understand you, and I would do it if I could. But I have not the power, Spirit. I have not the power.', "If there is any person in the town who feels emotion caused by this man's death, show that person to me, Spirit! I beseech you.", 'Is it good, or bad?', 'Bad,', 'We are quite ruined?', 'No. There is hope yet, Caroline.', 'If _he_ relents, there is! Nothing is past hope, if such a miracle has happened.', 'He is past relenting, He is dead.', "What the half-drunken woman, whom I told you of last night, said to me when I tried to see him and obtain a week's delay, and what I thought was a mere excuse to avoid me, turns out to have been quite true. He was not only very ill, but dying, then.", 'To whom will our debt be transferred?', "I don't know. But, before that time, we shall be ready with the money; and, even though we were not, it would be bad fortune indeed to find so merciless a creditor in his successor. We may sleep to-night with light hearts, Caroline!", 'Let me see some tenderness connected with a death, or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be for ever present to me.', "'And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them.'", 'The colour hurts my eyes,', "They're better now again, It makes them weak by candle-light; and I wouldn't show weak eyes to your father, when he comes home, for the world. It must be near his time.", 'Past it rather, But I think he has walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings, mother.', 'I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon his shoulder very fast indeed.', 'And so have I, Often.', 'And so have I,', 'But he was very light to carry, and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble: no trouble. And there is your father at the door!', 'and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble: no trouble. And there is your father at the door!', 'Sunday! You went to-day, then, Robert?', "Yes, my dear, I wish you could have gone. It would have done you good to see how green a place it is. But you'll see it often. I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday. My little, little child! My little child!", "On which, for he is the pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him. 'I am heartily sorry for it, Mr. Cratchit,' he said, 'and heartily sorry for your good wife.' By-the-bye, how he ever knew _that_ I don't know.", 'Knew what, my dear?', 'Why, that you were a good wife,', 'Everybody knows that,', "Very well observed, my boy! I hope they do. 'Heartily sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife. If I can be of service to you in any way,' he said, giving me his card, 'that's where I live. Pray come to me.' Now, it wasn't, for the sake of anything he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this was quite delightful. It really seemed as if he had known our Tiny Tim, and felt with us.", "I'm sure he's a good soul!", "You would be sure of it, my dear, if you saw and spoke to him. I shouldn't be at all surprised--mark what I say!--if he got Peter a better situation.", 'Only hear that, Peter,', 'And then, Peter will be keeping company with some one, and setting up for himself.', 'Get along with you!', "It's just as likely as not, one of these days; though there's plenty of time for that, my dear. But, however and whenever we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?", 'Never, father!', 'And I know, I know, my dears, that when we recollect how patient and how mild he was, although he was a little, little child, we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim in doing it.', 'No, never, father!', 'I am very happy, I am very happy!', 'Spectre, something informs me that our parting moment is at hand. I know it, but I know not how. Tell me what man that was whom we saw lying dead?', 'This court, through which we hurry now, is where my place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time. I see the house. Let me behold what I shall be in days to come.', 'The house is yonder, Why do you point away?', 'Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point, answer me one question. Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of the things that May be only?', 'answer me one question. Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of the things that May be only?', "Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered in, they must lead, But if the courses be departed from, the ends will change. Say it is thus with what you show me!", 'Am _I_ that man who lay upon the bed?', 'No, Spirit! Oh no, no!', 'Spirit! hear me! I am not the man I was. I will not be the man I must have been but for this intercourse. Why show me this, if I am past all hope?', 'Good Spirit, your nature intercedes for me, and pities me. Assure me that I yet may change these shadows you have shown me by an altered life?', 'your nature intercedes for me, and pities me. Assure me that I yet may change these shadows you have shown me by an altered life?', 'I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year. I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future. The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. I will not shut out the lessons that they teach. Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this stone!', 'I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future! The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. Oh, Jacob Marley! Heaven and the Christmas Time be praised for this! I say it on my knees, old Jacob; on my knees!', 'They are not torn down, they are not torn down, rings and all. They are here--I am here--the shadows of the things that would have been may be dispelled. They will be. I know they will!', "I don't know what to do! I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a school-boy. I am as giddy as a drunken man. A merry Christmas to everybody! A happy New Year to all the world! Hallo here! Whoop! Hallo!", 'I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a school-boy. I am as giddy as a drunken man. A merry Christmas to everybody! A happy New Year to all the world! Hallo here! Whoop! Hallo!', "There's the saucepan that the gruel was in! There's the door by which the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered! There's the corner where the Ghost of Christmas Present sat! There's the window where I saw the wandering Spirits! It's all right, it's all true, it all happened. Ha, ha, ha!", "I don't know what day of the month it is, I don't know how long I have been among the Spirits. I don't know anything. I'm quite a baby. Never mind. I don't care. I'd rather be a baby. Hallo! Whoop! Hallo here!", "What's to-day?", 'EH?', "What's to-day, my fine fellow?", 'To-day! Why, CHRISTMAS DAY.', "It's Christmas Day! I haven't missed it. The Spirits have done it all in one night. They can do anything they like. Of course they can. Of course they can. Hallo, my fine fellow!", 'Hallo!', "Do you know the Poulterer's in the next street but one, at the corner?", 'I should hope I did,', "An intelligent boy! A remarkable boy! Do you know whether they've sold the prize Turkey that was hanging up there?--Not the little prize Turkey: the big one?", 'What! the one as big as me?', "What a delightful boy! It's a pleasure to talk to him. Yes, my buck!", "It's hanging there now,", 'Is it? Go and buy it.', 'Walk-ER!', "No, no, I am in earnest. Go and buy it, and tell 'em to bring it here, that I may give them the directions where to take it. Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling. Come back with him in less than five minutes, and I'll give you half-a-crown!", "I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's, He shan't know who sends it. It's twice the size of Tiny Tim. Joe Miller never made such a joke as sending it to Bob's will be!", "I shall love it as long as I live! I scarcely ever looked at it before. What an honest expression it has in its face! It's a wonderful knocker!--Here's the Turkey. Hallo! Whoop! How are you? Merry Christmas!", "Why, it's impossible to carry that to Camden Town, You must have a cab.", 'My dear sir, how do you do? I hope you succeeded yesterday. It was very kind of you. A merry Christmas to you, sir!', 'Mr. Scrooge?', 'Yes, That is my name, and I fear it may not be pleasant to you. Allow me to ask your pardon. And will you have the goodness----', 'Lord bless me! My dear Mr. Scrooge, are you serious?', 'My dear Mr. Scrooge, are you serious?', 'If you please, Not a farthing less. A great many back-payments are included in it, I assure you. Will you do me that favour?', "My dear sir, I don't know what to say to such munifi----", "Don't say anything, please, Come and see me. Will you come and see me?", 'I will!', 'Thankee, I am much obliged to you. I thank you fifty times. Bless you!', 'Is your master at home, my dear?', 'Yes sir.', 'Where is he, my love?', "He's in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress. I'll show you up-stairs, if you please.", "Thankee. He knows me, I'll go in here, my dear.", 'Fred!', "Why, bless my soul! who's that?", "It's I. Your uncle Scrooge. I have come to dinner. Will you let me in, Fred?", 'Hallo! What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?', 'I am very sorry, sir, I _am_ behind my time.', 'You are! Yes. I think you are. Step this way, sir, if you please.', "It's only once a year, sir, It shall not be repeated. I was making rather merry yesterday, sir.", "Now, I'll tell you what, my friend, I am not going to stand this sort of thing any longer. And therefore, and therefore I am about to raise your salary!", "A merry Christmas, Bob! A merrier Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you for many a year! I'll raise your salary, and endeavour to assist your struggling family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob! Make up the fires and buy another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!", 'meandering Let us have no meandering.', 'Mrs. David Copperfield, I think,', 'Yes,', 'Miss Trotwood, You have heard of her, I dare say?', 'Now you see her,', 'Take off your cap, child, and let me see you.', 'Why, bless my heart! You are a very Baby!', 'In the name of Heaven, why Rookery?', 'Do you mean the house, ma', 'Why Rookery? Cookery would have been more to the purpose, if you had had any practical ideas of life, either of you.', 'The name was Mr. Copperfield  returned my mother. ', 'Where are the birds?', 'The--?', 'The rooks--what has become of them?', 'There have not been any since we have lived here, We thought--Mr. Copperfield thought--it was quite a large rookery; but the nests were very old ones, and the birds have deserted them a long while.', 'David Copperfield all over! David Copperfield from head to foot! Calls a house a rookery when there', 'Mr. Copperfield, is dead, and if you dare to speak unkindly of him to me--', 'Well? and when do you expect--', 'I am all in a tremble, I don s the matter. I shall die, I am sure!', 'No, no, no, Have some tea.', 'Oh dear me, dear me, do you think it will do me any good?', 'Of course it will, It', 'I don am,', 'Bless the Baby! I don', 'Peggotty,', 'Peggotty! Do you mean to say, child, that any human being has gone into a Christian church, and got herself named Peggotty? It  said my mother, faintly. ', 'Here! Peggotty! Tea. Your mistress is a little unwell. Don', 'You were speaking about its being a girl, I have no doubt it will be a girl. I have a presentiment that it must be a girl. Now child, from the moment of the birth of this girl--', 'Perhaps boy,', 'I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl, Don s birth, child, I intend to be her friend. I intend to be her godmother, and I beg you', 'And was David good to you, child? Were you comfortable together?', 'We were very happy, Mr. Copperfield was only too good to me.', 'What, he spoilt you, I suppose?', 'For being quite alone and dependent on myself in this rough world again, yes, I fear he did indeed,', 'Well! Don  said Miss Betsey.  t you? Yes.', 'And a governess?', 'I was nursery-governess in a family where Mr. Copperfield came to visit. Mr. Copperfield was very kind to me, and took a great deal of notice of me, and paid me a good deal of attention, and at last proposed to me. And I accepted him. And so we were married,', 'Ha! Poor Baby! Do you know anything?', 'I beg your pardon, ma', 'About keeping house, for instance,', 'Not much, I fear, Not so much as I could wish. But Mr. Copperfield was teaching me--', 'Well, well! I kept my housekeeping-book regularly, and balanced it with Mr. Copperfield every night,', 'Well, well! Don  --', 'You  said Miss Betsey,  t do it!', 'David had bought an annuity for himself with his money, I know, What did he do for you?', 'Mr. Copperfield, was so considerate and good as to secure the reversion of a part of it to me.', 'How much?', 'A hundred and five pounds a year,', 'He might have done worse,', 'Some local irritation, ma', 'What!', 'Some local irritation, ma', 'Nonsense!', 'Well?', 'Well, ma  returned Mr. Chillip,  am.', 'Ba--a--ah!', 'Well?', 'Well, ma  returned Mr. Chillip,  am.', 'Ya--a--ah!', 'Well, ma', 'What upon?', 'Mercy on the man, what  cried my aunt, impatiently.  t he speak?', 'Be calm, my dear ma', 'There is no longer any occasion for uneasiness, ma', 'Well, ma  resumed Mr. Chillip, as soon as he had courage,  am, and well over.', 'How is she?', 'Well, ma  returned Mr. Chillip.  am. It may do her good.', 'And SHE. How is SHE?', 'The baby, How is she?', 'Ma  returned Mr. Chillip,  s a boy.', 'Peggotty, were you ever married?', 'Lord, Master Davy, What', 'But WERE you ever married, Peggotty? You are a very handsome woman, an', 'Me handsome, Davy! Lawk, no, my dear! But what put marriage in your head?', 'I don t marry more than one person at a time, may you, Peggotty?', 'Certainly not,', 'But if you marry a person, and the person dies, why then you may marry another person, mayn', 'YOU MAY, if you choose, my dear. That', 'But what is your opinion, Peggotty?', 'My opinion is, that I never was married myself, Master Davy, and that I don s all I know about the subject.', 'You an', 'Now let me hear some more about the Crorkindills, for I an', 'What does that mean?', 'Oh, Davy!', 'Dear boy! I cannot wonder at his devotion!', 'Let us say "good night", my fine boy,', 'Good night!', 'Come! Let us be the best friends in the world! Shake hands!', 'Why, that', 'Much obliged to you, Peggotty, I have had a VERY pleasant evening.', 'A stranger or so makes an agreeable change,', 'A very agreeable change, indeed,', 'Not such a one as this, Mr. Copperfield wouldn  said Peggotty. ', 'Good Heavens! you', 'God knows you have, ma  returned Peggotty.   said my mother-- t mean how can you dare, Peggotty, but how can you have the heart--to make me so uncomfortable and say such bitter things to me, when you are well aware that I haven', 'The more  returned Peggotty,  t do. No! That it won', 'How can you be so aggravating, as to talk in such an unjust manner! How can you go on as if it was all settled and arranged, Peggotty, when I tell you over and over again, you cruel thing, that beyond the commonest civilities nothing has passed! You talk of admiration. What am I to do? If people are so silly as to indulge the sentiment, is it my fault? What am I to do, I ask you? Would you wish me to shave my head and black my face, or disfigure myself with a burn, or a scald, or something of that sort? I dare say you would, Peggotty. I dare say you', 'And my dear boy, my own little Davy! Is it to be hinted to me that I am wanting in affection for my precious treasure, the dearest little fellow that ever was!', 'Nobody never went and hinted no such a thing,', 'You did, Peggotty! You know you did. What else was it possible to infer from what you said, you unkind creature, when you know as well as I do, that on his account only last quarter I wouldn t deny it. Am I a naughty mama to you, Davy? Am I a nasty, cruel, selfish, bad mama? Say I am, my child; say "yes", dear boy, and Peggotty will love you; and Peggotty t love you at all, do I?', 'Not yet,', 'And who', 'That', 'Davy who? Jones?', 'Copperfield,', 'What! Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield  cried the gentleman. ', 'The pretty little widow?', 'Quinion, take care, if you please. Somebody', 'Who is?', 'Only Brooks of Sheffield,', 'And what is the opinion of Brooks of Sheffield, in reference to the projected business?', 'Why, I don  replied Mr. Murdstone; ', 'What was it they said, Davy? Tell me again. I can', '"Bewitching--"', 'It was never bewitching, It never could have been bewitching, Davy. Now I know it wasn', 'Yes, it was. "Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield", And, "pretty."', 'No, no, it was never pretty. Not pretty,', 'Yes it was. "Pretty little widow."', 'What foolish, impudent creatures! What ridiculous men! An', 'Well, Ma.', 'Don t know.', 'Master Davy, how should you like to go along with me and spend a fortnight at my brother t that be a treat?', 'Is your brother an agreeable man, Peggotty?', 'Oh, what an agreeable man he is! Then there', 'Then there', 'Why then I  said Peggotty, intent upon my face,  ll let us go. I', 'But what re away? She can', 'I say! Peggotty! She can', 'Oh, bless you! Don s going to stay for a fortnight with Mrs. Grayper. Mrs. Grayper', 'Here  screamed Peggotty, ', 'Yon r Davy!', 'That  said I. ', 'That r Davy,', 'Glad to see you, sir, You ll find us ready.', 'How  said Mr. Peggotty. ', 'I m sure, Well, sir, if you can make out here, fur a fortnut,   her, and Ham, and little Em', 'Mr. Peggotty!', 'Sir,', 'Did you give your son the name of Ham, because you lived in a sort of ark?', 'No, sir. I never giv him no name.', 'Who gave him that name, then?', 'Why, sir, his father giv it him,', 'I thought you were his father!', 'My brother Joe was his father,', 'Dead, Mr. Peggotty?', 'Drowndead,', 'Little Em  I said, glancing at her.  t she, Mr. Peggotty?', 'No, sir. My brother-in-law, Tom, was her father.', 'Drowndead,', 'Haven', 'No, master, I', 'A bachelor! Why, who', 'That', 'Gummidge, Mr. Peggotty?', 'You  I said to Em', 'No, ly, shaking her head,  m afraid of the sea.', 'Afraid! I an', 'Ah! but it  said Em I have seen it very cruel to some of our men. I have seen it tear a boat as big as our house, all to pieces.', 'I hope it wasn', 'That father was drownded in? ly. ', 'Nor him?', 'Besides, ly, as she looked about for shells and pebbles,  s daughter, and my uncle Dan is a fisherman.', 'Dan is Mr. Peggotty, is he?', 'Uncle Dan--yonder,', 'Yes. I mean him. He must be very good, I should think?', 'Good? ly.  d give him a sky-blue coat with diamond buttons, nankeen trousers, a red velvet waistcoat, a cocked hat, a large gold watch, a silver pipe, and a box of money.', 'You would like to be a lady?', 'I should like it very much. We would all be gentlefolks together, then. Me, and uncle, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge. We wouldn s, to be sure, and we em with money when they come to any hurt.', 'Don', 'No, You don', 'I  said little Em But I wake when it blows, and tremble to think of Uncle Dan and Ham and believe I hear  s why I should like so much to be a lady. But I', 'Like two young mavishes,', 'Oh, it  said Peggotty--I again mean our Peggotty-- s not more disagreeable to you than to us.', 'I feel it more,', 'the creeps a lone lorn creetur', 'It is certainly very cold, Everybody must feel it so.', 'I feel it more than other people,', 'Well, Mates, and how are you?', 'What  said Mr. Peggotty, with a clap of his hands. ', 'What', 'Nothing, You l?', 'Why yes, I', 'I', 'Drive! I don  returned Mr. Peggotty with an honest laugh. ', 'Very ready, Yes, yes, very ready. I am sorry it should be along of me that you', 'Yes, yes, very ready. I am sorry it should be along of me that you', 'Along o t along o  said Mr. Peggotty.  t ye believe a bit on it.', 'Yes, yes, it is, I know what I am. I know that I am a lone lorn creetur s my misfortun', 'I an  said Mrs. Gummidge.  t feel  em, but I an t wonder at it. I', 'It  said Mrs. Gummidge.  t a fit return. I had better go into the house and die. I am a lone lorn creetur l, I', 'She un!', 'Why, Peggotty! isn', 'Yes, yes, Master Davy, She ll--I', 'Peggotty! What', 'Nothing', 'Something m sure. Where', 'Where', 'Yes. Why hasn', 'Bless the precious boy! What is it? Speak, my pet!', 'Not dead, too! Oh, she', 'You see, dear, I should have told you before now, but I hadn t azackly s militia of words--', 'but I hadn t azackly s militia of words--', 'Go on, Peggotty,', 'Master Davy, What do you think? You have got a Pa!', 'A new one,', 'A new one?', 'Come and see him.', 'I don  --', 'Now, Clara my dear, Recollect! control yourself, always control yourself! Davy boy, how do you do?', 'Davy, What', 'Nothing. Davy, Davy, my child!', 'Davy, my child!', 'This is your doing, Peggotty, you cruel thing! I have no doubt at all about it. How can you reconcile it to your conscience, I wonder, to prejudice my own boy against me, or against anybody who is dear to me? What do you mean by it, Peggotty?', 'It  cried my mother.   cried my mother, turning from one of us to the other, in her pettish wilful manner, ', 'What', 'I am very sorry, Edward, I meant to be very good, but I am so uncomfortable.', 'Indeed! That', 'I say it  returned my mother, pouting;  t it?', 'Go you below, my love, David and I will come down, together. My friend, do you know your mistress', 'do you know your mistress', 'She has been my mistress a long time, sir, I ought to know it. That  he answered. ', 'David, if I have an obstinate horse or dog to deal with, what do you think I do?', 'I don', 'I beat him.', 'I make him wince, and smart. I say to myself, "I', 'Dirt,', 'You have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow, and you understood me very well, I see. Wash that face, sir, and come down with me.', 'Clara, my dear, you will not be made uncomfortable any more, I hope. We shall soon improve our youthful humours.', 'Is that your boy, sister-in-law?', 'Generally speaking, I don ye do, boy?', 'Wants manner!', 'Now, Clara, my dear, I am come here, you know, to relieve you of all the trouble I can. You --my mother blushed but laughed, and seemed not to dislike this character-- ll be so good as give me your keys, my dear, I', 'Clara! Clara! I wonder at you.', 'Oh, it  cried my mother,  s very well for you to talk about firmness, but you wouldn', 'It  said my mother, ', 'My own house? Clara!', 'OUR own house, I mean, I hope you must know what I mean, Edward--it s evidence, ask Peggotty if I didn t interfered with!', 'Edward, let there be an end of this. I go tomorrow.', 'Jane Murdstone, be silent! How dare you to insinuate that you don', 'I am sure, I don t ask much. I am not unreasonable. I only want to be consulted sometimes. I am very much obliged to anybody who assists me, and I only want to be consulted as a mere form, sometimes. I thought you were pleased, once, with my being a little inexperienced and girlish, Edward--I am sure you said so--but you seem to hate me for it now, you are so severe.', 'Edward, let there be an end of this. I go tomorrow.', 'Jane Murdstone, Will you be silent? How dare you?', 'Clara, you surprise me! You astound me! Yes, I had a satisfaction in the thought of marrying an inexperienced and artless person, and forming her character, and infusing into it some amount of that firmness and decision of which it stood in need. But when Jane Murdstone is kind enough to come to my assistance in this endeavour, and to assume, for my sake, a condition something like a housekeeper', 'Oh, pray, pray, Edward, don t, my dear!', 'When Jane Murdstone meets, I say, with a base return, that feeling of mine is chilled and altered.', 'Don  implored my mother very piteously.  t, Edward! I can t say it, if I wasn ll tell you I', 'Oh, don t bear to hear it. Whatever I am, I am affectionate. I know I am affectionate. I wouldn t sure that I am. Ask Peggotty. I am sure she m affectionate.', 'There is no extent of mere weakness, Clara, that can have the least weight with me. You lose breath.', 'Pray let us be friends, I couldn s very good of you, Edward, with your strength of mind, to endeavour to correct them for me. Jane, I don', 'Jane Murdstone, any harsh words between us are, I hope, uncommon. It is not my fault that so unusual an occurrence has taken place tonight. I was betrayed into it by another. Nor is it your fault. You were betrayed into it by another. Let us both try to forget it. And as this, is not a fit scene for the boy--David, go to bed!', 'is not a fit scene for the boy--David, go to bed!', 'miserable sinners', 'Oh, Davy, Davy!', 'Now, Clara, be firm with the boy. Don s childish. He knows his lesson, or he does not know it.', 'He does NOT know it,', 'I am really afraid he does not,', 'Then, you see, Clara, you should just give him the book back, and make him know it.', 'Yes, certainly, that is what I intend to do, my dear Jane. Now, Davy, try once more, and don', 'Clara!', 'I tell you, Clara, I have been often flogged myself.', 'To be sure; of course,', 'Certainly, my dear Jane, But--but do you think it did Edward good?', 'Do you think it did Edward harm, Clara?', 'That', 'Now, David, you must be far more careful today than usual.', 'Clara!', 'I am not quite well, my dear Jane, I think,', 'Why, Jane, we can hardly expect Clara to bear, with perfect firmness, the worry and torment that David has occasioned her today. That would be stoical. Clara is greatly strengthened and improved, but we can hardly expect so much from her. David, you and I will go upstairs, boy.', 'Mr. Murdstone! Sir! Don t beat me! I have tried to learn, sir, but I can t indeed!', 'Can  he said.  ll try that.', 'Is that you, Peggotty?', 'Yes, my own precious Davy, Be as soft as a mouse, or the Cat', 'How', 'What is going to be done with me, Peggotty dear? Do you know?', 'School. Near London, s answer. I was obliged to get her to repeat it, for she spoke it the first time quite down my throat, in consequence of my having forgotten to take my mouth away from the keyhole and put my ear there; and though her words tickled me a good deal, I didn', 'When, Peggotty?', 'Tomorrow.', 'Is that the reason why Miss Murdstone took the clothes out of my drawers?', 'Yes, Box.', 'Shan', 'Yes, Morning.', 'Davy, dear. If I ain t because I don s because I thought it better for you. And for someone else besides. Davy, my darling, are you listening? Can you hear?', 'Ye-ye-ye-yes, Peggotty!', 'My own! What I want to say, is. That you must never forget me. For I ll take as much care of your mama, Davy. As ever I took of you. And I won ll be glad to lay her poor head. On her stupid, cross old Peggotty ll write to you, my dear. Though I ain ll--I  Peggotty fell to kissing the keyhole, as she couldn', 'Thank you, dear Peggotty! Oh, thank you! Thank you! Will you promise me one thing, Peggotty? Will you write and tell Mr. Peggotty and little Em em all my love--especially to little Em', 'Oh, Davy! That you could hurt anyone I love! Try to be better, pray to be better! I forgive you; but I am so grieved, Davy, that you should have such bad passions in your heart.', 'Master Copperfield', 'Clara!', 'Ready, my dear Jane, Good-bye, Davy. You are going for your own good. Good-bye, my child. You will come home in the holidays, and be a better boy.', 'Clara!', 'Certainly, my dear Jane, I forgive you, my dear boy. God bless you!', 'Clara!', 'All the way where?', 'There,', 'Where', 'Near London,', 'Why that horse, would be deader than pork afore he got over half the ground.', 'would be deader than pork afore he got over half the ground.', 'Are you only going to Yarmouth then?', 'That  said the carrier.  ll take you to--wherever it is.', 'Did SHE make ', 'Peggotty, do you mean, sir?', 'Ah! Her.', 'Yes. She makes all our pastry, and does all our cooking.', 'Do she though? t whistle. He sat looking at the horse', 'No sweethearts, I b', 'Sweetmeats did you say, Mr. Barkis?', 'Hearts, Sweet hearts; no person walks with her!', 'With Peggotty?', 'Ah! Her.', 'Oh, no. She never had a sweetheart.', 'Didn', 'So she makes, all the apple parsties, and doos all the cooking, do she?', 'all the apple parsties, and doos all the cooking, do she?', 'Well. I  said Mr. Barkis.  raps you might be writin', 'I shall certainly write to her,', 'Ah! Well! If you was writin raps you ; would you?', 'That Barkis is willing, Is that all the message?', 'Ye-es, Ye-es. Barkis is willin', 'But you will be at Blunderstone again tomorrow, Mr. Barkis,', 'Is that the little gentleman from Blunderstone?', 'Yes, ma', 'What name?', 'Copperfield, ma', 'That won  returned the lady.  s dinner is paid for here, in that name.', 'Is it Murdstone, ma', 'If you  said the lady, ', 'There', 'My eye! It seems a good deal, don', 'It does seem a good deal,', 'There was a gentleman here, yesterday, a stout gentleman, by the name of Topsawyer--perhaps you know him?', 'No, I don', 'In breeches and gaiters, broad-brimmed hat, grey coat, speckled choker,', 'No, I haven', 'He came in here, ordered a glass of this ale--WOULD order it--I told him not--drank it, and fell dead. It was too old for him. It oughtn s the fact.', 'Why you see, our people don em. But I m used to it, and use is everything. I don ll hurt me, if I throw my head back, and take it off quick. Shall I?', 'What have we got here? Not chops?', 'Chops,', 'Lord bless my soul! I didn s the very thing to take off the bad effects of that beer! Ain', 'How', 'It', 'Pudding! Why, bless me, so it is! What! You don s a batter-pudding!', 'Yes, it is indeed.', 'Why, a batter-pudding, is my favourite pudding! Ain un, and let ll get most.', 'Oh! my eye! I am sorry for that.', 'Why?', 'Oh, Lord! that s ribs--two ribs--a little boy he was. I should say he was--let me see--how old are you, about?', 'That  he said. ', 'There  he returned. ', 'It  he said,  s the way we s nothing else, except the waiter. Never mind the ink. I lose by that.', 'What should you--what should I--how much ought I to--what would it be right to pay the waiter, if you please?', 'If I hadn t the cowpock, I wouldn t support a aged pairint, and a lovely sister, I wouldn', 'Is there anybody here for a yoongster booked in the name of Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, to be left till called for?', 'Try Copperfield, if you please, sir,', 'Is there anybody here for a yoongster, booked in the name of Murdstone, from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, but owning to the name of Copperfield, to be left till called for? Come! IS there anybody?', 'You  he said. ', 'I', 'If you please, sir, is it far?', 'It', 'Is that far, sir?', 'It  he said.  s about six miles.', 'Can you cook this young gentleman', 'Can I? Yes can I, sure!', 'How', 'Ah, she  said the first old woman.  s one of her bad days. If the fire was to go out, through any accident, I verily believe she', 'Have you got your flute with you?', 'Yes,', 'Have a blow at it, Do!', 'The new boy,', 'Here! The cobbler  he said,  ve been out, Mr. Mell, and he says he can em any more. He says there ain', 'I beg your pardon, sir, if you please, I', 'Dog? What dog?', 'Isn', 'Isn', 'That', 'No, Copperfield, that s a boy. My instructions are, Copperfield, to put this placard on your back. I am sorry to make such a beginning with you, but I must do it.', 'So! This is the young gentleman whose teeth are to be filed! Turn him round.', 'There  returned the man with the wooden leg. ', 'There has been no opportunity.', 'Come here, sir!', 'Come here!', 'I have the happiness of knowing your father-in-law, and a worthy man he is, and a man of a strong character. He knows me, and I know him. Do YOU know me? Hey?', 'Not yet, sir,', 'Not yet? Hey? But you will soon. Hey?', 'You will soon. Hey?', 'I  whispered Mr. Creakle, letting it go at last, with a screw at parting that brought the water into my eyes.  m a Tartar.', 'A Tartar,', 'When I say I  said Mr. Creakle; ', '--Will have a thing done, I will have it done,', 'I am a determined character, That s what I do. My flesh and blood when it rises against me, is not my flesh and blood. I discard it. Has that fellow been here again?', 'No,', 'No, He knows better. He knows me. Let him keep away. I say let him keep away, for he knows me. Now you have begun to know me too, my young friend, and you may go. Take him away.', 'If you please, sir--', 'If you please, sir, if I might be allowed (I am very sorry indeed, sir, for what I did) to take this writing off, before the boys come back--', 'What money have you got, Copperfield?', 'You had better give it to me to take care of, At least, you can if you like. You needn t like.', 'Do you want to spend anything now?', 'No thank you,', 'You can, if you like, you know, Say the word.', 'No, thank you, sir,', 'Perhaps you  said Steerforth. ', 'Very good, You', 'And another shilling or so in biscuits, and another in fruit, eh? I say, young Copperfield, you', 'Well! We must make it stretch as far as we can; that ll do the best in my power for you. I can go out when I like, and I  With these words he put the money in his pocket, and kindly told me not to make myself uneasy; he would take care it should be all right. He was as good as his word, if that were all right which I had a secret misgiving was nearly all wrong--for I feared it was a waste of my mother', 'There you are, young Copperfield, and a royal spread you', 'bounceable bumptious', 'Good night, young Copperfield, I   re very kind, I am very much obliged to you.', 'You haven', 'No,', 'That  said Steerforth. ', 'Good night, sir,', 'Now, boys, this is a new half. Take care what you t flinch. It will be of no use your rubbing yourselves; you won', 'And do you recollect them?', 'Oh yes,', 'Then I tell you what, young Copperfield, you shall tell  t get to sleep very early at night, and I generally wake rather early in the morning. We em one after another. We', 'the half', 'Now, I  said he: ', 'Silence! What does this mean! It s maddening. How can you do it to me, boys?', 'Silence, Mr. Steerforth!', 'Silence yourself, Whom are you talking to?', 'Sit down,', 'Sit down yourself, and mind your business.', 'If you think, Steerforth, that I am not acquainted with the power you can establish over any mind here or that I have not observed you, within a few minutes, urging your juniors on to every sort of outrage against me, you are mistaken.', 'I don  said Steerforth, coolly;  m not mistaken, as it happens.', 'And when you make use of your position of favouritism here, sir, to insult a gentleman--', 'A what?--where is he?', 'Young Copperfield, stop a bit. I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for all. When you take the liberty of calling me mean or base, or anything of that sort, you are an impudent beggar. You are always a beggar, you know; but when you do that, you are an impudent beggar.', 'stop a bit. I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for all. When you take the liberty of calling me mean or base, or anything of that sort, you are an impudent beggar. You are always a beggar, you know; but when you do that, you are an impudent beggar.', 'Mr. Mell, you have not forgotten yourself, I hope?', 'you have not forgotten yourself, I hope?', 'No, sir, no, No, sir. No. I have remembered myself, I--no, Mr. Creakle, I have not forgotten myself, I--I have remembered myself, sir. I--I--could wish you had remembered me a little sooner, Mr. Creakle. It--it--would have been more kind, sir, more just, sir. It would have saved me something, sir.', 'Now, sir, as he don', 'What did he mean by talking about favourites, then?', 'Favourites? Who talked about favourites?', 'He did,', 'And pray, what did you mean by that, sir?', 'I meant, Mr. Creakle, as I said; that no pupil had a right to avail himself of his position of favouritism to degrade me.', 'To degrade YOU? My stars! But give me leave to ask you, Mr. What ; and here Mr. Creakle folded his arms, cane and all, upon his chest, and made such a knot of his brows that his little eyes were hardly visible below them;   said Mr. Creakle, darting his head at him suddenly, and drawing it back again, ', 'the principal of this establishment, and your employer.', 'It was not judicious, sir, I am willing to admit, I should not have done so, if I had been cool.', 'Then he said I was mean, and then he said I was base, and then I called him a beggar. If I had been cool, perhaps I shouldn', 'I am surprised, Steerforth--although your candour does you honour, does you honour, certainly--I am surprised, Steerforth, I must say, that you should attach such an epithet to any person employed and paid in Salem House, sir.', 'That  said Mr. Creakle, ', 'Deny that he is a beggar, Steerforth? Why, where does he go a-begging?', 'If he is not a beggar himself, his near relation  said Steerforth.  s all the same.', 'Since you expect me, Mr. Creakle, to justify myself, and to say what I mean,--what I have to say is, that his mother lives on charity in an alms-house.', 'and to say what I mean,--what I have to say is, that his mother lives on charity in an alms-house.', 'Now, you hear what this gentleman says, Mr. Mell. Have the goodness, if you please, to set him right before the assembled school.', 'He is right, sir, without correction, what he has said is true.', 'Be so good then as declare publicly, will you, whether it ever came to my knowledge until this moment?', 'whether it ever came to my knowledge until this moment?', 'I believe not directly,', 'Why, you know not, Don', 'I apprehend you never supposed my worldly circumstances to be very good, You know what my position is, and always has been, here.', 'I apprehend, if you come to that, that you ll part, if you please. The sooner the better.', 'There is no time, like the present.', 'Sir, to you!', 'I take my leave of you, Mr. Creakle, and all of you, James Steerforth, the best wish I can leave you is that you may come to be ashamed of what you have done today. At present I would prefer to see you anything rather than a friend, to me, or to anyone in whom I feel an interest.', 'James Steerforth, the best wish I can leave you is that you may come to be ashamed of what you have done today. At present I would prefer to see you anything rather than a friend, to me, or to anyone in whom I feel an interest.', 'Who has ill-used him, you girl?', 'Why, you have,', 'What have I done?', 'What have you done? Hurt his feelings, and lost him his situation.', 'His feelings? His feelings will soon get the better of it, I t it?--do you suppose I am not going to write home, and take care that he gets some money? Polly?', 'Cheer up, Mas ! Why, how you have growed!', 'Am I grown?', 'Growed, Mas ? Ain', 'Ain', 'Do you know how mama is, Mr. Peggotty? And how my dear, dear, old Peggotty is?', 'Oncommon,', 'And little Em', 'On--common,', 'You see, knowing as you was partial to a little relish with your wittles when you was along with us, we took the liberty. The old Mawther biled  em. Yes, Mrs. Gummidge, I do assure you, she biled ', 'We come, you see, the wind and tide making in our favour, in one of our Yarmouth lugs to Gravesen , I was to come over and inquire for Mas ly as they was oncommon toe-be-sure. Little Em ll write to my sister when I go back, as I see you and as you was similarly oncommon, and so we make it quite a merry-go-rounder.', 'She s wot she  said Mr. Peggotty. ', 'Her pretty face!', 'Her learning!', 'Her writing! Why it', 'Don', 'Aye, aye? I am glad to see them. How are you both?', 'You must let them know at home, if you please, Mr. Peggotty, when that letter is sent, that Mr. Steerforth is very kind to me, and that I don', 'when that letter is sent, that Mr. Steerforth is very kind to me, and that I don', 'Nonsense! You mustn', 'And if Mr. Steerforth ever comes into Norfolk or Suffolk, Mr. Peggotty, while I am there, you may depend upon it I shall bring him to Yarmouth, if he will let me, to see your house. You never saw such a good house, Steerforth. It', 'Made out of a boat, is it? It', 'So  tis, sir, You l n! Mas , gen m s right. A thorough-built boatman! Hor, hor! That', 'Well, sir, I thankee, sir, I thankee! I do my endeavours in my line of life, sir.', 'The best of men can do no more, Mr. Peggotty,', 'I s wot you do yourself, sir, and wot you do well--right well! I thankee, sir. I m rough, sir, but I m ready, you unnerstand. My house ain s hearty at your service if ever you should come along with Mas m a reg  said Mr. Peggotty, by which he meant snail, and this was in allusion to his being slow to go, for he had attempted to go after every sentence, and had somehow or other come back again; ', 'You look very well, Mr. Barkis,', 'I gave your message, Mr. Barkis, I wrote to Peggotty.', 'Ah!', 'Wasn', 'Why, no,', 'Not the message?', 'The message was right enough, perhaps, but it come to an end there.', 'Nothing come of it, No answer.', 'There was an answer expected, was there, Mr. Barkis?', 'When a man says he , it s a-waitin', 'Well, Mr. Barkis?', 'Well, s ears;  s been a-waitin', 'that man  for a answer ever since.', 'Have you told her so, Mr. Barkis?', 'No--no, I ain t a-goin', 'Would you like me to do it, Mr. Barkis? You might tell her, if you would, that Barkis was a-waitin', 'that Barkis was a-waitin', 'Her name?', 'Ah!', 'Peggotty.', 'Chrisen name? Or nat', 'Oh, it', 'Is it though?', 'Well! Says you, "Peggotty! Barkis is waitin ," says you.', 'He is your brother, Davy, my pretty boy! My poor child!', 'Peggotty, What', 'What are you doing, you stupid creature?', 'Oh, drat the man! He wants to marry me.', 'It would be a very good match for you; wouldn', 'Oh! I don  said Peggotty.  t ask me. I wouldn t have anybody.', 'Then, why don', 'Tell him so, He has never said a word to me about it. He knows better. If he was to make so bold as say a word to me, I should slap his face.', 'Peggotty, dear, you are not going to be married?', 'Me, ma  returned Peggotty, staring. ', 'Not just yet?', 'Never!', 'Don', 'Me leave you, my precious! Not for all the world and his wife. Why, what', 'Me leave you? I think I see myself. Peggotty go away from you? I should like to catch her at it! No, no, no, not she, my dear. It isn t some Cats that would be well enough pleased if she did, but they sha t be pleased. They shall be aggravated. I m too deaf, and too lame, and too blind, and too mumbly for want of teeth, to be of any use at all, even to be found fault with, than I shall go to my Davy, and ask him to take me in.', 'And, Peggotty, I shall be glad to see you, and I', 'Bless your dear heart! I know you will!', 'I wonder, what s great-aunt? Lor, Peggotty! what nonsense you talk!', 'Well, but I really do wonder, ma', 'What can have put such a person in your head? Is there nobody else in the world to come there?', 'I don  said Peggotty,  s on account of being stupid, but my head never can pick and choose its people. They come and they go, and they don t go, just as they like. I wonder what', 'How absurd you are, Peggotty! One would suppose you wanted a second visit from her.', 'Lord forbid!', 'Well then, don s a good soul, Miss Betsey is shut up in her cottage by the sea, no doubt, and will remain there. At all events, she is not likely ever to trouble us again.', 'No! No, that ain d leave Davy anything?', 'Good gracious me, Peggotty, what a nonsensical woman you are! when you know that she took offence at the poor dear boy', 'I suppose she wouldn', 'Why should she be inclined to forgive him now?', 'Now that he', 'As if this poor little innocent in its cradle had ever done any harm to you or anybody else, you jealous thing! You had much better go and marry Mr. Barkis, the carrier. Why don', 'I should make Miss Murdstone happy, if I was to,', 'What a bad disposition you have, Peggotty! You are as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it is possible for a ridiculous creature to be. You want to keep the keys yourself, and give out all the things, I suppose? I shouldn', 'I know what you mean, you cross thing, I understand you, Peggotty, perfectly. You know I do, and I wonder you don n t you heard her say, over and over again, that she thinks I am too thoughtless and too--a--a--', 'Pretty,', 'Well, and if she is so silly as to say so, can I be blamed for it?', 'No one says you can,', 'No, I should hope not, indeed! Haven t know myself that I AM suited for; and isn t she do all sorts of things, and grope into all sorts of places, coal-holes and pantries and I don t be very agreeable--and do you mean to insinuate that there is not a sort of devotion in that?', 'I don', 'You do, Peggotty, You never do anything else, except your work. You are always insinuating. You revel in it. And when you talk of Mr. Murdstone', 'I never talked of ', 'No, Peggotty, but you insinuated. That s the worst of you. You WILL insinuate. I said, at the moment, that I understood you, and you see I did. When you talk of Mr. Murdstone t believe you really do, in your heart, Peggotty), you must be as well convinced as I am how good they are, and how they actuate him in everything. If he seems to have been at all stern with a certain person, Peggotty--you understand, and so I am sure does Davy, that I am not alluding to anybody present--it is solely because he is satisfied that it is for a certain person s good. He is better able to judge of it than I am; for I very well know that I am a weak, light, girlish creature, and that he is a firm, grave, serious man. And he takes, he takes great pains with me; and I ought to be very thankful to him, and very submissive to him even in my thoughts; and when I am not, Peggotty, I worry and condemn myself, and feel doubtful of my own heart, and don', 'There, Peggotty, don t bear it. You are my true friend, I know, if I have any in the world. When I call you a ridiculous creature, or a vexatious thing, or anything of that sort, Peggotty, I only mean that you are my true friend, and always have been, ever since the night when Mr. Copperfield first brought me home here, and you came out to the gate to meet me.', 'I am glad to hear you are sorry, David,', 'How do you do, ma', 'Ah, dear me! How long are the holidays?', 'A month, ma', 'Counting from when?', 'From today, ma', 'Oh! Then here', 'My dear Jane!', 'Good heavens, Clara, do you see?', 'See what, my dear Jane? where?', 'He  cried Miss Murdstone. ', 'Davy! come here!', 'I declare, they are exactly alike. I suppose they are mine. I think they are the colour of mine. But they are wonderfully alike.', 'What are you talking about, Clara?', 'My dear Jane, I find that the baby s are exactly alike.', 'Clara! you are a positive fool sometimes.', 'My dear Jane,', 'A positive fool, Who else could compare my brother', 'David, I am sorry to observe that you are of a sullen disposition.', 'As sulky as a bear!', 'Now, David, a sullen obdurate disposition is, of all tempers, the worst.', 'And the boy  remarked his sister, ', 'I beg your pardon, my dear Jane, but are you quite sure--I am certain you', 'I should be somewhat ashamed of myself, Clara, if I could not understand the boy, or any boy. I don', 'No doubt, my dear Jane, your understanding is very vigorous--', 'Oh dear, no! Pray don', 'But I am sure it is, and everybody knows it is. I profit so much by it myself, in many ways--at least I ought to--that no one can be more convinced of it than myself; and therefore I speak with great diffidence, my dear Jane, I assure you.', 'We t understand the boy, Clara, We t understand him at all. He is much too deep for me. But perhaps my brother', 'I think, Clara, that there may be better and more dispassionate judges of such a question than you.', 'Edward, you are a far better judge of all questions than I pretend to be. Both you and Jane are. I only said--', 'You only said something weak and inconsiderate, Try not to do it again, my dear Clara, and keep a watch upon yourself.', 'I was sorry, David, I remarked, to observe that you are of a sullen disposition. This is not a character that I can suffer to develop itself beneath my eyes without an effort at improvement. You must endeavour, sir, to change it. We must endeavour to change it for you.', 'I beg your pardon, sir, I have never meant to be sullen since I came back.', 'Don  he returned so fiercely, that I saw my mother involuntarily put out her trembling hand as if to interpose between us. ', 'I will have a respectful, prompt, and ready bearing towards myself, and towards Jane Murdstone, and towards your mother. I will not have this room shunned as if it were infected, at the pleasure of a child. Sit down.', 'One thing more, I observe that you have an attachment to low and common company. You are not to associate with servants. The kitchen will not improve you, in the many respects in which you need improvement. Of the woman who abets you, I say nothing--since you, Clara, from old associations and long-established fancies, have a weakness respecting her which is not yet overcome.', 'A most unaccountable delusion it is!', 'I only say, that I disapprove of your preferring such company as Mistress Peggotty, and that it is to be abandoned. Now, David, you understand me, and you know what will be the consequence if you fail to obey me to the letter.', 'Away with Melancholy t stand still to be learnt, but would go threading my grandmother', 'David Copperfield is to go into the parlour.', 'Don  said Mr. Sharp.  s time enough, my boy, don', 'David Copperfield, I want to speak to you very particularly. I have something to tell you, my child.', 'You are too young to know how the world changes every day, and how the people in it pass away. But we all have to learn it, David; some of us when we are young, some of us when we are old, some of us at all times of our lives.', 'When you came away from home at the end of the vacation, were they all well? Was your mama well?', 'Because, I grieve to tell you that I hear this morning your mama is very ill.', 'She is very dangerously ill,', 'She is dead.', 'Master Copperfield?', 'Yes, sir.', 'Will you come with me, young sir, if you please, and I shall have the pleasure of taking you home.', 'Well, How do you get on, Minnie?', 'We shall be ready by the trying-on time, Don', 'That', 'Father! What a porpoise you do grow!', 'Well, I don  he replied, considering about it. ', 'You are such a comfortable man, you see, You take things so easy.', 'No use taking ', 'No, indeed, We are all pretty gay here, thank Heaven! Ain', 'I hope so, my dear, As I have got my breath now, I think I', 'And by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint of money, But fashions are like human beings. They come in, nobody knows when, why, or how; and they go out, nobody knows when, why, or how. Everything is like life, in my opinion, if you look at it in that point of view.', 'Bring up that tea and bread-and-butter!', 'I have been acquainted with you, I have been acquainted with you a long time, my young friend.', 'Have you, sir?', 'All your life, I may say before it. I knew your father before you. He was five foot nine and a half, and he lays in five-and-twen-ty foot of ground.', 'RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat,', 'He lays in five and twen-ty foot of ground, if he lays in a fraction, It was either his request or her direction, I forget which.', 'Do you know how my little brother is, sir?', 'RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat.', 'He is in his mother', 'Oh, poor little fellow! Is he dead?', 'Don  said Mr. Omer.  s dead.', 'Well, Joram! How do you get on?', 'All right, Done, sir.', 'What! you were at it by candle-light last night, when I was at the club, then? Were you?', 'Yes, As you said we could make a little trip of it, and go over together, if it was done, Minnie and me--and you.', 'Oh! I thought you were going to leave me out altogether,', '--As you was so good as to say that, why I turned to with a will, you see. Will you give me your opinion of it?', 'I will, My dear would you like to see your--', 'No, father,', 'I thought it might be agreeable, my dear, But perhaps you', 'And your shirts, have you brought ', 'Yes, ma', 'And how is Master David?', 'Dear me! Our little friends grow up around us. They grow out of our knowledge, ma', 'There is a great improvement here, ma', 'She was never well,', 'I think she got to be more timid, and more frightened-like, of late; and that a hard word was like a blow to her. But she was always the same to me. She never changed to her foolish Peggotty, didn', '"It', 'I never left her afterwards, She often talked to them two downstairs--for she loved them; she couldn', 'On the last night, in the evening, she kissed me, and said: "If my baby should die too, Peggotty, please let them lay him in my arms, and bury us together." (It was done; for the poor lamb lived but a day beyond her.) "Let my dearest boy go with us to our resting-place," she said, "and tell him that his mother, when she lay here, blessed him not once, but a thousand times."', 'It was pretty far in the night,', 'Daybreak had come, and the sun was rising, when she said to me, how kind and considerate Mr. Copperfield had always been to her, and how he had borne with her, and told her, when she doubted herself, that a loving heart was better and stronger than wisdom, and that he was a happy man in hers. "Peggotty, my dear," she said then, "put me nearer to you," for she was very weak. "Lay your good arm underneath my neck," she said, "and turn me to you, for your face is going far off, and I want it to be near." I put it as she asked; and oh Davy! the time had come when my first parting words to you were true--when she was glad to lay her poor head on her stupid cross old Peggotty', 'Peggotty, Mr. Murdstone likes me less than he used to. He never liked me much, Peggotty; but he would rather not even see me now, if he can help it.', 'Perhaps it', 'I am sure, Peggotty, I am sorry too. If I believed it was his sorrow, I should not think of it at all. But it s not that.', 'How do you know it', 'Oh, his sorrow is another and quite a different thing. He is sorry at this moment, sitting by the fireside with Miss Murdstone; but if I was to go in, Peggotty, he would be something besides.', 'What would he be?', 'Angry, If he was only sorry, he wouldn', 'If he was only sorry, he wouldn', 'Davy,', 'Yes, Peggotty? I have tried, my dear, all ways I could think of--all the ways there are, and all the ways there ain s no such a thing, my love.', 'And what do you mean to do, Peggotty, Do you mean to go and seek your fortune?', 'I expect I shall be forced to go to Yarmouth, and live there.', 'You might have gone farther off, and been as bad as lost. I shall see you sometimes, my dear old Peggotty, there. You won', 'Contrary ways, please God! As long as you are here, my pet, I shall come over every week of my life to see you. One day, every week of my life!', 'I s, first, for another fortnight t want you here at present, you might be let to go along with me.', 'The boy will be idle there, and idleness is the root of all evil. But, to be sure, he would be idle here--or anywhere, in my opinion.', 'Humph! it is of more importance than anything else--it is of paramount importance--that my brother should not be disturbed or made uncomfortable. I suppose I had better say yes.', 'it is of more importance than anything else--it is of paramount importance--that my brother should not be disturbed or made uncomfortable. I suppose I had better say yes.', 'It', 'It ain', 'Peggotty is quite comfortable now, Mr. Barkis,', 'Is she, though?', 'ARE you pretty comfortable?', 'But really and truly, you know. Are you? Are you? Really and truly pretty comfortable? Are you? Eh?', 'Are you pretty comfortable though?', 'I say, it was all right.', 'It didn  said Mr. Barkis, nodding confidentially. ', 'You know who was willin  said my friend. ', 'It  said Mr. Barkis, shaking hands;  m a friend of your s all right.', 'Like his impudence, but I don', 'Why--I suppose you would like me as much then, Peggotty, as you do now?', 'Tell me what should you say, darling?', 'If you were thinking of being married--to Mr. Barkis, Peggotty?', 'Yes,', 'I should think it would be a very good thing. For then you know, Peggotty, you would always have the horse and cart to bring you over to see me, and could come for nothing, and be sure of coming.', 'The sense of the dear! What I have been thinking of, this month back! Yes, my precious; and I think I should be more independent altogether, you see; let alone my working with a better heart in my own house, than I could in anybody else t know what I might be fit for, now, as a servant to a stranger. And I shall be always near my pretty  said Peggotty, musing, ', 'But I wouldn  said Peggotty, cheerily ', 'Look at me, Peggotty, and see if I am not really glad, and don', 'Well, my life, I have thought of it night and day, every way I can, and I hope the right way; but I ll keep it to ourselves, Davy, you and me. Barkis is a good plain creature, and if I tried to do my duty by him, I think it would be my fault if I wasn t pretty comfortable,', 'She  said Mr. Peggotty, wiping the heat consequent on the porterage of Peggotty she  looking at the Dutch clock,  s time. We all on us feel the loss of her, bless ye!', 'Cheer up, Mawther!', 'I feel it more than anybody else, I , and she used to be a t go contrary with me.', 'un!', 'Oh, it  said little Em', 'Why, you knew who it was, Em', 'And didn  said Em', 'A little puss, it is!', 'So sh  is! Mas , so sh', 'Ah! here  said Mr. Peggotty, giving Ham a backhanded knock in the chest,  em, though he don', 'em, though he don', 'If I had you for my guardian, Mr. Peggotty, I don', 'I don', 'Well said, Mas ! Hoorah! Well said! Nor more you wouldn --Here he returned Mr. Peggotty ly got up and kissed Mr. Peggotty.  s your friend, sir?', 'Steerforth?', 'That  cried Mr. Peggotty, turning to Ham. ', 'You said it was Rudderford,', 'Well! And ye steer with a rudder, don t fur off. How is he, sir?', 'He was very well indeed when I came away, Mr. Peggotty.', 'There  said Mr. Peggotty, stretching out his pipe.  s a friend, if you talk of friends! Why, Lord love my heart alive, if it ain', 'He is very handsome, is he not?', 'Handsome! He stands up to you like--like a--why I don t stand up to you like. He', 'Yes! That  said I.  s as brave as a lion, and you can', 'And I do suppose, now, that in the way of book-larning he most anything.', 'Yes, he knows everything. He is astonishingly clever.', 'There', 'Nothing seems to cost him any trouble, He knows a task if he only looks at it. He is the best cricketer you ever saw. He will give you almost as many men as you like at draughts, and beat you easily.', 'He is such a speaker, that he can win anybody over; and I don d say if you were to hear him sing, Mr. Peggotty.', 'Then, he  said I, quite carried away by my favourite theme,  s hardly possible to give him as much praise as he deserves. I am sure I can never feel thankful enough for the generosity with which he has protected me, so much younger and lower in the school than himself.', 'Em  said Peggotty, ', 'No. It had better be done by somebody else, Dan  said Mrs. Gummidge.  m a lone lorn creetur s that ain', 'I  myself, and everythink that reminds me of creetur t lone and lorn, goes contrary with me.', 'Come, old gal! Take and heave it.', 'No, Dan  returned Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her head.  t feel like me, Dan t go contrary with you, nor you with them; you had better do it yourself.', 'If I felt less, I could do more. You don l; thinks don', 'What name was it as I wrote up in the cart?', 'Clara Peggotty,', 'What name would it be as I should write up now, if there was a tilt here?', 'Clara Peggotty, again?', 'Clara Peggotty BARKIS!', 'Young or old, Davy dear, as long as I am alive and have this house over my head, you shall find it as if I expected you here directly minute. I shall keep it every day, as I used to keep your old little room, my darling; and if you was to go to China, you might think of it as being kept just the same, all the time you were away.', 'What! Brooks!', 'No, sir, David Copperfield,', 'Don  said the gentleman.  s your name.', 'And how do you get on, and where are you being educated, Brooks?', 'He is at home at present, He is not being educated anywhere. I don', 'Humph! Fine weather!', 'I suppose you are a pretty sharp fellow still? Eh, Brooks?', 'Aye! He is sharp enough, You had better let him go. He will not thank you for troubling him.', 'David, to the young this is a world for action; not for moping and droning in. As you do,', 'Jane Murdstone, leave it to me, if you please. I say, David, to the young this is a world for action, and not for moping and droning in. It is especially so for a young boy of your disposition, which requires a great deal of correcting; and to which no greater service can be done than to force it to conform to the ways of the working world, and to bend it and break it.', 'For stubbornness won  said his sister ', 'I suppose you know, David, that I am not rich. At any rate, you know it now. You have received some considerable education already. Education is costly; and even if it were not, and I could afford it, I am of opinion that it would not be at all advantageous to you to be kept at school. What is before you, is a fight with the world; and the sooner you begin it, the better.', 'You have heard the "counting-house" mentioned sometimes,', 'The counting-house, sir? Of Murdstone and Grinby, in the wine trade,', 'You have heard the "counting-house" mentioned, or the business, or the cellars, or the wharf, or something about it.', 'I think I have heard the business mentioned, sir, s resources.  t know when.', 'It does not matter when, Mr. Quinion manages that business.', 'Mr. Quinion suggests that it gives employment to some other boys, and that he sees no reason why it shouldn', 'He having, no other prospect, Murdstone.', 'Those terms are, that you will earn enough for yourself to provide for your eating and drinking, and pocket-money. Your lodging (which I have arranged for) will be paid by me. So will your washing--', '--Which will be kept down to my estimate,', 'Your clothes will be looked after for you, too, as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get them for yourself. So you are now going to London, David, with Mr. Quinion, to begin the world on your own account.', 'as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get them for yourself. So you are now going to London, David, with Mr. Quinion, to begin the world on your own account.', 'In short, you are provided for, and will please to do your duty.', 'This, is he.', 'This, is Master Copperfield. I hope I see you well, sir?', 'I am, thank Heaven, quite well. I have received a letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he mentions that he would desire me to receive into an apartment in the rear of my house, which is at present unoccupied--and is, in short, to be let as a--in short, as a bedroom--the young beginner whom I have now the pleasure to--', 'This is Mr. Micawber,', 'Ahem! that is my name.', 'Mr. Micawber, is known to Mr. Murdstone. He takes orders for us on commission, when he can get any. He has been written to by Mr. Murdstone, on the subject of your lodgings, and he will receive you as a lodger.', 'My address, is Windsor Terrace, City Road. I--in short, I live there.', 'Under the impression, that your peregrinations in this metropolis have not as yet been extensive, and that you might have some difficulty in penetrating the arcana of the Modern Babylon in the direction of the City Road,--in short, that you might lose yourself--I shall be happy to call this evening, and install you in the knowledge of the nearest way.', 'At what hour, shall I--', 'At about eight,', 'At about eight, I beg to wish you good day, Mr. Quinion. I will intrude no longer.', 'I never thought, before I was married, when I lived with papa and mama, that I should ever find it necessary to take a lodger. But Mr. Micawber being in difficulties, all considerations of private feeling must give way.', 'Mr. Micawber  said Mrs. Micawber;  t know. When I lived at home with papa and mama, I really should have hardly understood what the word meant, in the sense in which I now employ it, but experientia does it,--as papa used to say.', 'If Mr. Micawber  said Mrs. Micawber, ', 'Twopence-halfpenny, is the price of the Genuine Stunning ale.', 'Then, just draw me a glass of the Genuine Stunning, if you please, with a good head to it.', 'Master Copperfield, I make no stranger of you, and therefore do not hesitate to say that Mr. Micawber', 'With the exception of the heel of a Dutch cheese--which is not adapted to the wants of a young family there is really not a scrap of anything in the larder. I was accustomed to speak of the larder when I lived with papa and mama, and I use the word almost unconsciously. What I mean to express is, that there is nothing to eat in the house.', 'Dear me!', 'No, my dear Master Copperfield, far be it from my thoughts! But you have a discretion beyond your years, and can render me another kind of service, if you will; and a service I will thankfully accept of.', 'I have parted with the plate myself, Six tea, two salt, and a pair of sugars, I have at different times borrowed money on, in secret, with my own hands. But the twins are a great tie; and to me, with my recollections, of papa and mama, these transactions are very painful. There are still a few trifles that we could part with. Mr. Micawber --this was the girl from the workhouse--', 'And then, I have no doubt I shall, please Heaven, begin to be beforehand with the world, and to live in a perfectly new manner, if--in short, if anything turns up.', 'Your petitioners therefore humbly approach your honourable house, His gracious Majesty  as if the words were something real in his mouth, and delicious to taste; Mr. Micawber, meanwhile, listening with a little of an author', 'On such an occasion I will give you, Master Copperfield, in a little more flip, the memory of my papa and mama.', 'the memory of my papa and mama.', 'Are they dead, ma', 'My mama departed this life, before Mr. Micawber', 'May I ask, ma', 'My family, my family are of opinion that Mr. Micawber should quit London, and exert his talents in the country. Mr. Micawber is a man of great talent, Master Copperfield.', 'Of great talent, My family are of opinion, that, with a little interest, something might be done for a man of his ability in the Custom House. The influence of my family being local, it is their wish that Mr. Micawber should go down to Plymouth. They think it indispensable that he should be upon the spot.', 'That he may be ready?', 'Exactly, That he may be ready--in case of anything turning up.', 'And do you go too, ma', 'I never will desert Mr. Micawber. Mr. Micawber may have concealed his difficulties from me in the first instance, but his sanguine temper may have led him to expect that he would overcome them. The pearl necklace and bracelets which I inherited from mama, have been disposed of for less than half their value; and the set of coral, which was the wedding gift of my papa, has been actually thrown away for nothing. But I never will desert Mr. Micawber. No! I never will do it! It', 'Mr. Micawber has his faults. I do not deny that he is improvident. I do not deny that he has kept me in the dark as to his resources and his liabilities both, but I never will desert Mr. Micawber!', 'Emma, my angel! what is the matter?', 'I never will desert you, Micawber!', 'My life! I am perfectly aware of it.', 'He is the parent of my children! He is the father of my twins! He is the husband of my affections, and I ne--ver--will--desert Mr. Micawber!', 'How is Mrs. Micawber now, sir?', 'Very low, reaction. Ah, this has been a dreadful day! We stand alone now--everything is gone from us!', 'I shall never, Master Copperfield, revert to the period when Mr. Micawber was in difficulties, without thinking of you. Your conduct has always been of the most delicate and obliging description. You have never been a lodger. You have been a friend.', 'My dear, Copperfield, has a heart to feel for the distresses of his fellow-creatures when they are behind a cloud, and a head to plan, and a hand to--in short, a general ability to dispose of such available property as could be made away with.', 'My dear young friend, I am older than you; a man of some experience in life, and--and of some experience, in short, in difficulties, generally speaking. At present, and until something turns up (which I am, I may say, hourly expecting), I have nothing to bestow but advice. Still my advice is so far worth taking, that--in short, that I have never taken it myself, and am the the miserable wretch you behold.', 'My dear Micawber!', 'I say, the miserable wretch you behold. My advice is, never do tomorrow what you can do today. Procrastination is the thief of time. Collar him!', 'My poor papa', 'My dear, your papa was very well in his way, and Heaven forbid that I should disparage him. Take him for all in all, we ne  Mr. Micawber looked aside at Mrs. Micawber, and added: ', 'My other piece of advice, Copperfield, you know. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen and six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six, result misery. The blossom is blighted, the leaf is withered, the god of day goes down upon the dreary scene, and--and in short you are for ever floored. As I am!', 'Master Copperfield, God bless you! I never can forget all that, you know, and I never would if I could.', 'Copperfield, farewell! Every happiness and prosperity! If, in the progress of revolving years, I could persuade myself that my blighted destiny had been a warning to you, I should feel that I had not occupied another man', 'Wot job?', 'To move a box,', 'Wot box?', 'Done with you for a tanner!', 'Wot! This is a pollis case, is it? You', 'You give me my money back, if you please, and leave me alone.', 'Come to the pollis! You shall prove it yourn to the pollis.', 'Give me my box and money, will you,', 'If you please, sir, I am to sell this for a fair price.', 'What do you call a price, now, for this here little weskit?', 'Oh! you know best, sir,', 'I can  said Mr. Dolloby. ', 'Would eighteenpence be?', 'Oh, what do you want? Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want? Oh, my lungs and liver, what do you want? Oh, goroo, goroo!', 'Oh, what do you want? Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want? Oh, my lungs and liver, what do you want? Oh, goroo!', 'I wanted to know, if you would buy a jacket.', 'Oh, let  cried the old man. ', 'Oh, how much for the jacket? Oh--goroo!--how much for the jacket?', 'Oh--goroo!--how much for the jacket?', 'Half-a-crown,', 'Oh, my lungs and liver, no! Oh, my eyes, no! Oh, my limbs, no! Eighteenpence. Goroo!', 'Well, I', 'Oh, my liver! Get out of the shop! Oh, my lungs, get out of the shop! Oh, my eyes and limbs--goroo!--don', 'Oh, my eyes and limbs! will you go for twopence more?', 'I can  I said; ', 'Oh, my lungs and liver, will you go for threepence?', 'I would go for nothing, if I could, but I want the money badly.', 'Oh, go-roo! will you go for fourpence?', 'Come here, when you  said the tinker,  ll rip your young body open.', 'Where are you going?', 'I am going to Dover,', 'Where do you come from?', 'I come from London,', 'What lay are you upon? Are you a prig?', 'N-no,', 'Ain  said the tinker,  ll knock your brains out.', 'Have you got the price of a pint of beer about you? If you have, out with it, afore I take it away!', 'If you have, out with it, afore I take it away!', 'I am very poor, and have got no money.', 'Why, what do you mean?', 'Sir!', 'What do you mean, by wearing my brother', 'Trotwood, Let me see. I know the name, too. Old lady?', 'Yes, rather.', 'Pretty stiff in the back?', 'Yes, I should think it very likely.', 'Carries a bag? bag with a good deal of room in it--is gruffish, and comes down upon you, sharp?', 'Why then, I tell you what, If you go up there, and keep right on till you come to some houses facing the sea, I think you t stand anything, so here', 'My mistress? What do you want with her, boy?', 'I want, to speak to her, if you please.', 'To beg of her, you mean,', 'No, indeed.', 'This is Miss Trotwood  said the young woman.  s all I have got to say.', 'Go away! Go along! No boys here!', 'If you please, ma', 'If you please, aunt.', 'EH?', 'If you please, aunt, I am your nephew.', 'Oh, Lord!', 'I am David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk--where you came, on the night when I was born, and saw my dear mama. I have been very unhappy since she died. I have been slighted, and taught nothing, and thrown upon myself, and put to work not fit for me. It made me run away to you. I was robbed at first setting out, and have walked all the way, and have never slept in a bed since I began the journey.', 'Mr. Dick, don t be a fool, whatever you are.', 'Mr. Dick, you have heard me mention David Copperfield? Now don', 'David Copperfield? David Copperfield? Oh yes, to be sure. David, certainly.', 'Well, this is his boy--his son. He would be as like his father as it', 'His son? David', 'Yes, and he has done a pretty piece of business. He has run away. Ah! His sister, Betsey Trotwood, never would have run away.', 'Oh! you think she wouldn', 'Bless and save the man, how he talks! Don t? She would have lived with her god-mother, and we should have been devoted to one another. Where, in the name of wonder, should his sister, Betsey Trotwood, have run from, or to?', 'Nowhere,', 'Well then, how can you pretend to be wool-gathering, Dick, when you are as sharp as a surgeon', 'What shall you do with him? Oh! do with him?', 'Yes, Come! I want some very sound advice.', 'Come! I want some very sound advice.', 'Why, if I was you, I should-- I should wash him!', 'Janet, Mr. Dick sets us all right. Heat the bath!', 'Pretty fellow, Poor fellow,', 'Whatever possessed that poor unfortunate Baby, that she must go and be married again, I can', 'Perhaps she fell in love with her second husband,', 'Fell in love! What do you mean? What business had she to do it?', 'Perhaps, she did it for pleasure.', 'Pleasure, indeed! A mighty pleasure for the poor Baby to fix her simple faith upon any dog of a fellow, certain to ill-use her in some way or other. What did she propose to herself, I should like to know! She had had one husband. She had seen David Copperfield out of the world, who was always running after wax dolls from his cradle. She had got a baby--oh, there were a pair of babies when she gave birth to this child sitting here, that Friday night!--and what more did she want?', 'She couldn  said my aunt.  s sister, Betsey Trotwood? Not forthcoming. Don', 'That little man of a doctor, with his head on one side, Jellips, or whatever his name was, what was he about? All he could do, was to say to me, like a robin redbreast--as he is--"It em!', 'Jellips, or whatever his name was, what was he about? All he could do, was to say to me, like a robin redbreast--as he is--"It em!', 'And then, as if this was not enough, and she had not stood sufficiently in the light of this child  said my aunt,  s light! And the natural consequence is, as anybody but a baby might have foreseen, that he prowls and wanders. He', 'she marries a second time--goes and marries a Murderer--or a man with a name like it--and stands in THIS child s as like Cain before he was grown up, as he can be.', 'And then there  said my aunt,   said my aunt, shaking her head, ', 'Well, well! the child is right to stand by those who have stood by him--Janet! Donkeys!', 'Now, Mr. Dick, I am going to ask you another question. Look at this child.', 'David', 'Exactly so, What would you do with him, now?', 'Do with David', 'Ay, with David', 'Oh! Yes. Do with--I should put him to bed.', 'Janet! Mr. Dick sets us all right. If the bed is ready, we', 'Hallo!', 'I have written to him,', 'To--?', 'To your father-in-law, I have sent him a letter that I', 'Does he know where I am, aunt?', 'I have told him,', 'Shall I--be--given up to him?', 'I don  said my aunt. ', 'Oh! I can  I exclaimed, ', 'I don  said my aunt, shaking her head.  t say, I am sure. We shall see.', 'I wish you  said my aunt, as she threaded her needle,  ll be glad to know how he gets on with his Memorial.', 'and give my compliments to Mr. Dick, and I', 'I suppose, you think Mr. Dick a short name, eh?', 'I thought it was rather a short name, yesterday,', 'You are not to suppose that he hasn  said my aunt, with a loftier air.  s the gentleman', 'But don t bear his name. That t know that it t. So take care, child, you don', 'Ha! Phoebus! How does the world go? I  he added, in a lower tone,  t wish it to be mentioned, but it  here he beckoned to me, and put his lips close to my ear-- s a mad world. Mad as Bedlam, boy!', 'Well, my compliments to her, and I--I believe I have made a start. I think I have made a start, You have been to school?', 'Yes, sir, for a short time.', 'Do you recollect the date, when King Charles the First had his head cut off?', 'Well, So the books say; but I don', 'It  said Mr. Dick, with a despondent look upon his papers, and with his hand among his hair again,   he said cheerfully, and rousing himself,  s time enough! My compliments to Miss Trotwood, I am getting on very well indeed.', 'What do you think of that for a kite?', 'I made it. We  said Mr. Dick. ', 'There  said Mr. Dick,  s my manner of diffusing  t know where they may come down. It', 'Well, child, And what of Mr. Dick, this morning?', 'What do you think of him?', 'Come! Your sister Betsey Trotwood would have told me what she thought of anyone, directly. Be as like your sister as you can, and speak out!', 'Is he--is Mr. Dick--I ask because I don', 'Not a morsel,', 'Oh, indeed!', 'If there is anything in the world, that Mr. Dick is not, it', 'He has been CALLED mad, I have a selfish pleasure in saying he has been called mad, or I should not have had the benefit of his society and advice for these last ten years and upwards--in fact, ever since your sister, Betsey Trotwood, disappointed me.', 'So long as that?', 'And nice people they were, who had the audacity to call him mad, Mr. Dick is a sort of distant connexion of mine--it doesn t enter into that. If it hadn s all.', 'A proud fool! Because his brother was a little eccentric--though he is not half so eccentric as a good many people--he didn', 'So I stepped in, and made him an offer. I said, "Your brother  said my aunt,  s mind is, except myself.', 'He had a favourite sister, a good creature, and very kind to him. But she did what they all do--took a husband. And HE did what they all do--made her wretched. It had such an effect upon the mind of Mr. Dick (that', 'Yes, aunt.', 'Ah! That s the figure, or the simile, or whatever it t he, if he thinks proper!', 'That s the figure, or the simile, or whatever it t he, if he thinks proper!', 'It  said my aunt,  s the reason why I insist upon it, that there shan', 'Is it a Memorial about his own history that he is writing, aunt?', 'Yes, child, He is memorializing the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Somebody or other--one of those people, at all events, who are paid to be memorialized--about his affairs. I suppose it will go in, one of these days. He hasn t signify; it keeps him employed.', 'I say again, nobody knows what that man s the most amenable and friendly creature in existence. If he likes to fly a kite sometimes, what of that! Franklin used to fly a kite. He was a Quaker, or something of that sort, if I am not mistaken. And a Quaker flying a kite is a much more ridiculous object than anybody else.', 'Go along with you! You have no business there. How dare you trespass? Go along! Oh! you bold-faced thing!', 'I don  cried my aunt, still shaking her head and gesticulating anything but welcome from the bow-window.  t be trespassed upon. I won  and I saw, from behind my aunt, a sort of hurried battle-piece, in which the donkey stood resisting everybody, with all his four legs planted different ways, while Janet tried to pull him round by the bridle, Mr. Murdstone tried to lead him on, Miss Murdstone struck at Janet with a parasol, and several boys, who had come to see the engagement, shouted vigorously. But my aunt, suddenly descrying among them the young malefactor who was the donkey', 'Shall I go away, aunt?', 'No, sir, Certainly not!', 'Oh! I was not aware at first to whom I had the pleasure of objecting. But I don t allow anybody to do it.', 'Your regulation is rather awkward to strangers,', 'Is it!', 'Miss Trotwood!', 'I beg your pardon, You are the Mr. Murdstone who married the widow of my late nephew, David Copperfield, of Blunderstone Rookery!--Though why Rookery, I don', 'I am,', 'You  returned my aunt, ', 'I so far agree with what Miss Trotwood has remarked, that I consider our lamented Clara to have been, in all essential respects, a mere child.', 'It is a comfort to you and me, ma  said my aunt, ', 'No doubt! And it certainly might have been, as you say, a better and happier thing for my brother if he had never entered into such a marriage. I have always been of that opinion.', 'I have no doubt you have, Janet, my compliments to Mr. Dick, and beg him to come down.', 'Mr. Dick. An old and intimate friend. On whose judgement, I rely.', 'Miss Trotwood: on the receipt of your letter, I considered it an act of greater justice to myself, and perhaps of more respect to you--', 'Thank you, You needn', 'To answer it in person, however inconvenient the journey, rather than by letter. This unhappy boy who has run away from his friends and his occupation--', 'And whose appearance, is perfectly scandalous and disgraceful.', 'Jane Murdstone, have the goodness not to interrupt me. This unhappy boy, Miss Trotwood, has been the occasion of much domestic trouble and uneasiness; both during the lifetime of my late dear wife, and since. He has a sullen, rebellious spirit; a violent temper; and an untoward, intractable disposition. Both my sister and myself have endeavoured to correct his vices, but ineffectually. And I have felt--we both have felt, I may say; my sister being fully in my confidence--that it is right you should receive this grave and dispassionate assurance from our lips.', 'It can hardly be necessary for me to confirm anything stated by my brother, but I beg to observe, that, of all the boys in the world, I believe this is the worst boy.', 'Strong!', 'But not at all too strong for the facts,', 'Ha! Well, sir?', 'I have my own opinions, as to the best mode of bringing him up; they are founded, in part, on my knowledge of him, and in part on my knowledge of my own means and resources. I am responsible for them to myself, I act upon them, and I say no more about them. It is enough that I place this boy under the eye of a friend of my own, in a respectable business; that it does not please him; that he runs away from it; makes himself a common vagabond about the country; and comes here, in rags, to appeal to you, Miss Trotwood. I wish to set before you, honourably, the exact consequences--so far as they are within my knowledge--of your abetting him in this appeal.', 'But about the respectable business first, If he had been your own boy, you would have put him to it, just the same, I suppose?', 'If he had been my brother  returned Miss Murdstone, striking in, ', 'Or if the poor child, his mother, had been alive, he would still have gone into the respectable business, would he?', 'I believe, that Clara would have disputed nothing which myself and my sister Jane Murdstone were agreed was for the best.', 'that Clara would have disputed nothing which myself and my sister Jane Murdstone were agreed was for the best.', 'Humph! Unfortunate baby!', 'The poor child', 'Died with her,', 'And there was no settlement of the little property--the house and garden--the what', 'It had been left to her, unconditionally, by her first husband,', 'Good Lord, man, there  said my aunt, ', 'My late wife loved her second husband, ma  said Mr. Murdstone, ', 'Your late wife, sir, was a most unworldly, most unhappy, most unfortunate baby, That', 'Merely this, Miss Trotwood, I am here to take David back--to take him back unconditionally, to dispose of him as I think proper, and to deal with him as I think right. I am not here to make any promise, or give any pledge to anybody. You may possibly have some idea, Miss Trotwood, of abetting him in his running away, and in his complaints to you. Your manner, which I must say does not seem intended to propitiate, induces me to think it possible. Now I must caution you that if you abet him once, you abet him for good and all; if you step in between him and me, now, you must step in, Miss Trotwood, for ever. I cannot trifle, or be trifled with. I am here, for the first and last time, to take him away. Is he ready to go? If he is not--and you tell me he is not; on any pretence; it is indifferent to me what--my doors are shut against him henceforth, and yours, I take it for granted, are open to him.', 'Well, ma', 'Indeed, Miss Trotwood, all that I could say has been so well said by my brother, and all that I know to be the fact has been so plainly stated by him, that I have nothing to add except my thanks for your politeness. For your very great politeness, I am sure,', 'And what does the boy say? Are you ready to go, David?', 'Mr. Dick, what shall I do with this child?', 'Mr. Dick, give me your hand, for your common sense is invaluable.', 'You can go when you like; I s all you say he is, at least I can do as much for him then, as you have done. But I don', 'Miss Trotwood, if you were a gentleman--', 'Bah! Stuff and nonsense! Don', 'How exquisitely polite! Overpowering, really!', 'Overpowering, really!', 'Do you think I don  said my aunt, turning a deaf ear to the sister, and continuing to address the brother, and to shake her head at him with infinite expression,  t know what a woeful day it was for the soft little creature when you first came in her way--smirking and making great eyes at her, I t say boh! to a goose!', 'I never heard anything so elegant!', 'Do you think I can  pursued my aunt,  t they? Ugh! Get along with you, do!', 'I never heard anything like this person in my life!', 'And when you had made sure of the poor little fool, God forgive me that I should call her so, and she gone where YOU won', 'This is either insanity or intoxication, s address towards herself;  s intoxication.', 'Mr. Murdstone, you were a tyrant to the simple baby, and you broke her heart. She was a loving baby--I know that; I knew it, years before you ever saw her--and through the best part of her weakness you gave her the wounds she died of. There is the truth for your comfort, however you like it. And you and your instruments may make the most of it.', 'Allow me to inquire, Miss Trotwood, whom you are pleased to call, in a choice of words in which I am not experienced, my brother', 'whom you are pleased to call, in a choice of words in which I am not experienced, my brother', 'It was clear enough, as I have told you, years before YOU ever saw her--and why, in the mysterious dispensations of Providence, you ever did see her, is more than humanity can comprehend--it was clear enough that the poor soft little thing would marry somebody, at some time or other; but I did hope it wouldn  said my aunt;  t wince! I know it', 'Good day, sir, and good-bye! Good day to you, too, ma  said my aunt, turning suddenly upon his sister.  ll knock your bonnet off, and tread upon it!', 'You', 'I shall be delighted, to be the guardian of David', 'Very good, that', 'Certainly, certainly. Call him Trotwood, certainly, David s Trotwood.', 'David s Trotwood.', 'Trotwood Copperfield, you mean,', 'Yes, to be sure. Yes. Trotwood Copperfield,', 'Trot, we must not forget your education.', 'Should you like to go to school at Canterbury?', 'Good, Should you like to go tomorrow?', 'Good, Janet, hire the grey pony and chaise tomorrow morning at ten o s clothes tonight.', 'Very happy indeed, thank you, aunt,', 'Is it a large school, aunt?', 'Why, I don  said my aunt.  s first.', 'Does he keep a school?', 'No, Trot, He keeps an office.', 'Is Mr. Wickfield at home, Uriah Heep?', 'Mr. Wickfield am, if you', 'Miss Betsey Trotwood, pray walk in. I was engaged for a moment, but you', 'Well, Miss Trotwood, what wind blows you here? Not an ill wind, I hope?', 'No, I have not come for any law.', 'That am, You had better come for anything else.', 'This is my nephew,', 'Wasn', 'My grand-nephew, that is to say,', 'Wasn', 'I have adopted him, and I have brought him here, to put to a school where he may be thoroughly well taught, and well treated. Now tell me where that school is, and what it is, and all about it.', 'Before I can advise you properly, the old question, you know. What', 'Deuce take the man! Always fishing for motives, when they', 'It must be a mixed motive, I think,', 'A mixed fiddlestick, You claim to have one plain motive in all you do yourself. You don', 'Ay, but I have only one motive in life, Miss Trotwood, Other people have dozens, scores, hundreds. I have only one. There s beside the question. The best school? Whatever the motive, you want the best?', 'At the best we have, your nephew couldn', 'But he could board somewhere else, I suppose?', 'Our little friend here might have some motive, perhaps, for objecting to the arrangements. I think we had better leave him behind?', 'It  said my aunt.  t know what to do, Trot.', 'It does happen unfortunately, But I', 'What', 'Leave your nephew here, for the present. He t disturb me at all. It', 'I am very much obliged to you, and so is he, I see; but--', 'Come! I know what you mean, You shall not be oppressed by the receipt of favours, Miss Trotwood. You may pay for him, if you like. We won', 'On that understanding, though it doesn', 'Then come and see my little housekeeper,', 'Trot, be a credit to yourself, to me, and Mr. Dick, and Heaven be with you!', 'Never, be mean in anything; never be false; never be cruel. Avoid those three vices, Trot, and I can always be hopeful of you.', 'The pony  said my aunt, ', 'By the by, Wickfield, you have not found any suitable provision for my wife', 'No, No. Not yet.', 'I could wish it done as soon as it can be done, Wickfield, for Jack Maldon is needy, and idle; and of those two bad things, worse things sometimes come. What does Doctor Watts say, "Satan finds some mischief still, for idle hands to do."', '"Satan finds some mischief still, for idle hands to do."', 'Egad, Doctor, if Doctor Watts knew mankind, he might have written, with as much truth, "Satan finds some mischief still, for busy hands to do." The busy people achieve their full share of mischief in the world, you may rely upon it. What have the people been about, who have been the busiest in getting money, and in getting power, this century or two? No mischief?', 'Jack Maldon will never be very busy in getting either, I expect,', 'Perhaps not, and you bring me back to the question, with an apology for digressing. No, I have not been able to dispose of Mr. Jack Maldon yet. I believe, I penetrate your motive, and it makes the thing more difficult.', 'My motive, is to make some suitable provision for a cousin, and an old playfellow, of Annie', 'Yes, I know, at home or abroad.', 'Aye! At home or abroad.', 'Your own expression, you know, Or abroad.', 'Surely, Surely. One or other.', 'One or other? Have you no choice?', 'No,', 'No?', 'Not the least.', 'No motive, for meaning abroad, and not at home?', 'No,', 'I am bound to believe you, and of course I do believe you, It might have simplified my office very much, if I had known it before. But I confess I entertained another impression.', 'A new boy, young gentlemen, Trotwood Copperfield.', 'You have never been to school, have you? Oh yes! Every day.', 'Ah, but you mean here, at your own home?', 'Papa couldn  she answered, smiling and shaking her head. ', 'He is very fond of you, I am sure,', 'Mama has been dead ever since I was born, I only know her picture, downstairs. I saw you looking at it yesterday. Did you think whose it was?', 'I only know her picture, downstairs. I saw you looking at it yesterday. Did you think whose it was?', 'Papa says so, too, Hark! That', 'There may be some, perhaps--I don  said Mr. Wickfield.  s a merit, or whether it', 'Here', 'I am but this moment quit of Mr. Maldon,', 'Yes, sir, but Mr. Maldon has come back, and he begs the favour of a word.', 'Doctor Strong, was that?', 'Doctor Strong, of course, I call him the old Doctor; it', 'I don', 'Well, Doctor Strong, Doctor Strong was of the same mind, I believed. But as it appears from the course you take with me he has changed his mind, why there d come back and say, that the sooner I am off the better. When a plunge is to be made into the water, it', 'There shall be as little lingering as possible, in your case, Mr. Maldon, you may depend upon it,', 'Thank  said the other.  t want to look a gift-horse in the mouth, which is not a gracious thing to do; otherwise, I dare say, my cousin Annie could easily arrange it in her own way. I suppose Annie would only have to say to the old Doctor--', 'Meaning that Mrs. Strong would only have to say to her husband--do I follow you?', 'Quite so, --would only have to say, that she wanted such and such a thing to be so and so; and it would be so and so, as a matter of course.', 'And why as a matter of course, Mr. Maldon?', 'Why, because Annie  said Mr. Jack Maldon, laughing. ', 'Compensation to the lady, sir?', 'To the lady, sir, However, I have said what I came to say, and, with another apology for this intrusion, I may take myself off. Of course I shall observe your directions, in considering the matter as one to be arranged between you and me solely, and not to be referred to, up at the Doctor', 'Have you dined?', 'Thank  said Mr. Maldon, ', 'To stay,', 'You are sure?', 'If you please. If I may!', 'Why, it', 'Not more dull for me than Agnes, sir. Not dull at all!', 'Than Agnes, Than Agnes!', 'Now I wonder, whether my Agnes tires of me. When should I ever tire of her! But that s quite different.', 'A dull old house, and a monotonous life; but I must have her near me. I must keep her near me. If the thought that I may die and leave my darling, or that my darling may die and leave me, comes like a spectre, to distress my happiest hours, and is only to be drowned in--', 'If it is miserable to bear, when she is here, what would it be, and she away? No, no, no. I cannot try that.', 'Stay with us, Trotwood, eh? I am glad of it. You are company to us both. It is wholesome to have you here. Wholesome for me, wholesome for Agnes, wholesome perhaps for all of us.', 'I am sure it is for me, sir, I am so glad to be here.', 'That  said Mr. Wickfield.   He shook hands with me upon it, and clapped me on the back; and told me that when I had anything to do at night after Agnes had left us, or when I wished to read for my own pleasure, I was free to come down to his room, if he were there and if I desired it for company', 'You are working late tonight, Uriah,', 'Yes, Master Copperfield,', 'I am not doing office-work, Master Copperfield,', 'What work, then?', 'I am improving my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield, I am going through Tidd', 'I suppose you are quite a great lawyer?', 'Me, Master Copperfield? Oh, no! I', 'I am well aware that I am the umblest person going, let the other be where he may. My mother is likewise a very umble person. We live in a numble abode, Master Copperfield, but have much to be thankful for. My father', 'What is he now?', 'He is a partaker of glory at present, Master Copperfield, But we have much to be thankful for. How much have I to be thankful for in living with Mr. Wickfield!', 'I have been with him, going on four year, Master Copperfield, Since a year after my father s kind intention to give me my articles, which would otherwise not lay within the umble means of mother and self!', 'Then, when your articled time is over, you', 'With the blessing of Providence, Master Copperfield,', 'Perhaps you s business, one of these days, and it will be Wickfield and Heep, or Heep late Wickfield.', 'Oh no, Master Copperfield, I am much too umble for that!', 'Mr. Wickfield is a most excellent man, Master Copperfield, If you have known him long, you know it, I am sure, much better than I can inform you.', 'If you have known him long, you know it, I am sure, much better than I can inform you.', 'Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield, Your aunt is a sweet lady, Master Copperfield!', 'A sweet lady, Master Copperfield! She has a great admiration for Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield, I believe?', 'I hope you have, too, Master Copperfield, But I am sure you must have.', 'Everybody must have,', 'Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield, for that remark! It is so true! Umble as I am, I know it is so true! Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield!', 'Mother will be expecting me, and getting uneasy; for though we are very umble, Master Copperfield, we are much attached to one another. If you would come and see us, any afternoon, and take a cup of tea at our lowly dwelling, mother would be as proud of your company as I should be.', 'Thank you, Master Copperfield, I suppose you stop here, some time, Master Copperfield?', 'Oh, indeed! I should think YOU would come into the business at last, Master Copperfield!', 'I have forgotten, Doctor, s mama, when we were seated, ', 'I thank you, ma', 'Many, many, many, happy returns, Not only for your own sake, but for Annie s, and many other people', 'My dear mama, never mind that now.', 'Annie, don  returned her mother. ', 'Old? Annie? Come!', 'Yes, John, Virtually, an old married woman. Although not old by years--for when did you ever hear me say, or who has ever heard me say, that a girl of twenty was old by years!--your cousin is the wife of the Doctor, and, as such, what I have described her. It is well for you, John, that your cousin is the wife of the Doctor. You have found in him an influential and kind friend, who will be kinder yet, I venture to predict, if you deserve it. I have no false pride. I never hesitate to admit, frankly, that there are some members of our family who want a friend. You were one yourself, before your cousin', 'No, really, my dear Doctor, you must excuse me if I appear to dwell on this rather, because I feel so very strongly. I call it quite my monomania, it is such a subject of mine. You are a blessing to us. You really are a Boon, you know.', 'Nonsense, nonsense,', 'No, no, I beg your pardon, With nobody present, but our dear and confidential friend Mr. Wickfield, I cannot consent to be put down. I shall begin to assert the privileges of a mother-in-law, if you go on like that, and scold you. I am perfectly honest and outspoken. What I am saying, is what I said when you first overpowered me with surprise--you remember how surprised I was?--by proposing for Annie. Not that there was anything so very much out of the way, in the mere fact of the proposal--it would be ridiculous to say that!--but because, you having known her poor father, and having known her from a baby six months old, I hadn', 'Aye, aye, Never mind.', 'But I DO mind, I mind very much. I recall these things that I may be contradicted if I am wrong. Well! Then I spoke to Annie, and I told her what had happened. I said, "My dear, here s free. At all events, my love," said I, "Doctor Strong is in an agitated state of mind, and must be answered. He cannot be kept in his present state of suspense." "Mama," said Annie, still crying, "would he be unhappy without me? If he would, I honour and respect him so much, that I think I will have him." So it was settled. And then, and not till then, I said to Annie, "Annie, Doctor Strong will not only be your husband, but he will represent your late father: he will represent the head of our family, he will represent the wisdom and station, and I may say the means, of our family; and will be, in short, a Boon to it." I used the word at the time, and I have used it again, today. If I have any merit it is consistency.', 'Mama, I hope you have finished? No, my dear Annie, I have not quite finished. Since you ask me, my love, I reply that I have not. I complain that you really are a little unnatural towards your own family; and, as it is of no use complaining to you. I mean to complain to your husband. Now, my dear Doctor, do look at that silly wife of yours.', 'When I happened to say to that naughty thing, the other day, that there was a family circumstance she might mention to you--indeed, I think, was bound to mention--she said, that to mention it was to ask a favour; and that, as you were too generous, and as for her to ask was always to have, she wouldn', 'Annie, my dear, That was wrong. It robbed me of a pleasure.', 'Almost the very words I said to her! Now really, another time, when I know what she would tell you but for this reason, and won', 'I shall be glad if you will,', 'Shall I?', 'Certainly.', 'Well, then, I will! That  And having, I suppose, carried her point, she tapped the Doctor', 'Annie, my dear, it is past your cousin Jack', 'it is past your cousin Jack', 'It  said Mrs. Markleham-- s viewed, it s before him. A young man really well deserves constant support and patronage, who makes such sacrifices.', 'Time will go fast with you, Mr. Jack Maldon, and fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly expect, perhaps, in the natural course of things, to greet you on your return. The next best thing is to hope to do it, and that', 'and fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly expect, perhaps, in the natural course of things, to greet you on your return. The next best thing is to hope to do it, and that', 'Farewell, Mr. Jack, A prosperous voyage out, a thriving career abroad, and a happy return home!', 'Poor Annie! She s the parting from her old playfellow and friend--her favourite cousin--that has done this. Ah! It', 'Annie, my dear, See here! You have lost a bow. Will anybody be so good as find a ribbon; a cherry-coloured ribbon?', 'Do you recollect where you had it last, Annie?', 'Trotwood, who', 'Frightens my aunt, sir?', 'for she  here he whispered softly,  t mention it--the wisest and most wonderful of women.', 'The first time he came, was--let me see--sixteen hundred and forty-nine was the date of King Charles', 'Yes, sir.', 'I don  said Mr. Dick, sorely puzzled and shaking his head.  t think I am as old as that.', 'Was it in that year that the man appeared, sir?', 'Why, really I don', 'Yes, sir.', 'I suppose history never lies, does it?', 'Oh dear, no, sir!', 'I can  said Mr. Dick, shaking his head.  s something wrong, somewhere. However, it was very soon after the mistake was made of putting some of the trouble out of King Charles', 'Walking about?', 'Walking about? Let me see, I must recollect a bit. N-no, no; he was not walking about.', 'Well, he wasn  said Mr. Dick, ', 'HAS he been hiding ever since?', 'To be sure he has, Never came out, till last night! We were walking last night, and he came up behind her again, and I knew him again.', 'And did he frighten my aunt again?', 'All of a shiver, Held by the palings. Cried. But, Trotwood, come here, why did she give him money, boy, in the moonlight?', 'why did she give him money, boy, in the moonlight?', 'He was a beggar, perhaps.', 'Oh, if that  said Uriah,  t our umbleness that prevents you, will you come this evening? But if it is our umbleness, I hope you won', 'Mother will be proud, indeed, Or she would be proud, if it wasn', 'Yet you didn', 'Oh dear, no, Master Copperfield! Oh, believe me, no! Such a thought never came into my head! I shouldn', 'Have you been studying much law lately?', 'Oh, Master Copperfield, my reading is hardly to be called study. I have passed an hour or two in the evening, sometimes, with Mr. Tidd.', 'Rather hard, I suppose? He is hard to me sometimes, But I don', 'There are expressions, you see, Master Copperfield--Latin words and terms--in Mr. Tidd, that are trying to a reader of my umble attainments.', 'Would you like to be taught Latin? I will teach it you with pleasure, as I learn it.', 'Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield, I am sure it', 'What nonsense, Uriah!', 'Oh, indeed you must excuse me, Master Copperfield! I am greatly obliged, and I should like it of all things, I assure you; but I am far too umble. There are people enough to tread upon me in my lowly state, without my doing outrage to their feelings by possessing learning. Learning ain', 'I think you are wrong, Uriah, I dare say there are several things that I could teach you, if you would like to learn them.', 'Oh, I don  he answered;  t judge well, perhaps, for them that are. I won m much too umble. Here is my umble dwelling, Master Copperfield!', 'This is a day to be remembered, my Uriah, I am sure, when Master Copperfield pays us a visit.', 'I said you', 'If I could have wished father to remain among us for any reason, it would have been, that he might have known his company this afternoon.', 'My Uriah, has looked forward to this, sir, a long while. He had his fears that our umbleness stood in the way, and I joined in them myself. Umble we are, umble we have been, umble we shall ever be,', 'I am sure you have no occasion to be so, ma  I said, ', 'Thank you, sir, We know our station and are thankful in it.', 'My dear Copperfield, this is indeed a meeting which is calculated to impress the mind with a sense of the instability and uncertainty of all human--in short, it is a most extraordinary meeting. Walking along the street, reflecting upon the probability of something turning up (of which I am at present rather sanguine), I find a young but valued friend turn up, who is connected with the most eventful period of my life; I may say, with the turning-point of my existence. Copperfield, my dear fellow, how do you do?', 'Thank you, She is tolerably convalescent. The twins no longer derive their sustenance from Nature  said Mr. Micawber, in one of his bursts of confidence, ', 'You are very good,', 'I have discovered my friend Copperfield, not in solitude, but partaking of a social meal in company with a widow lady, and one who is apparently her offspring--in short, her son. I shall esteem it an honour to be presented.', 'Any friend of my friend Copperfield  said Mr. Micawber, ', 'We are too umble, sir, my son and me, to be the friends of Master Copperfield. He has been so good as take his tea with us, and we are thankful to him for his company, also to you, sir, for your notice.', 'Ma  returned Mr. Micawber, with a bow, ', 'A pupil? I am extremely happy to hear it. Although a mind like my friend Copperfield --to Uriah and Mrs. Heep--  said Mr. Micawber, smiling, in another burst of confidence, ', 'Shall we go and see Mrs. Micawber, sir?', 'If you will do her that favour, Copperfield, I have no scruple in saying, in the presence of our friends here, that I am a man who has, for some years, contended against the pressure of pecuniary difficulties. Sometimes I have risen superior to my difficulties. Sometimes my difficulties have--in short, have floored me. There have been times when I have administered a succession of facers to them; there have been times when they have been too many for me, and I have given in, and said to Mrs. Micawber, in the words of Cato, "Plato, thou reasonest well. It  said Mr. Micawber, ', 'My dear, if you will mention to Copperfield what our present position is, which I have no doubt he will like to know, I will go and look at the paper the while, and see whether anything turns up among the advertisements.', 'I thought you were at Plymouth, ma', 'My dear Master Copperfield, we went to Plymouth.', 'To be on the spot,', 'Just so, To be on the spot. But, the truth is, talent is not wanted in the Custom House. The local influence of my family was quite unavailing to obtain any employment in that department, for a man of Mr. Micawber s abilities. He would only show the deficiency of the others. Apart from which, I will not disguise from you, my dear Master Copperfield, that when that branch of my family which is settled in Plymouth, became aware that Mr. Micawber was accompanied by myself, and by little Wilkins and his sister, and by the twins, they did not receive him with that ardour which he might have expected, being so newly released from captivity. In fact, this is between ourselves--our reception was cool.', 'Dear me!', 'Yes, It is truly painful to contemplate mankind in such an aspect, Master Copperfield, but our reception was, decidedly, cool. There is no doubt about it. In fact, that branch of my family which is settled in Plymouth became quite personal to Mr. Micawber, before we had been there a week.', 'Still, so it was, Under such circumstances, what could a man of Mr. Micawber', 'Then you all came back again, ma', 'We all came back again, Since then, I have consulted other branches of my family on the course which it is most expedient for Mr. Micawber to take--for I maintain that he must take some course, Master Copperfield, It is clear that a family of six, not including a domestic, cannot live upon air.', 'It is clear that a family of six, not including a domestic, cannot live upon air.', 'Certainly, ma', 'The opinion of those other branches of my family, is, that Mr. Micawber should immediately turn his attention to coals.', 'To what, ma', 'To coals, To the coal trade. Mr. Micawber was induced to think, on inquiry, that there might be an opening for a man of his talent in the Medway Coal Trade. Then, as Mr. Micawber very properly said, the first step to be taken clearly was, to come and see the Medway. Which we came and saw. I say "we", Master Copperfield; for I never will, I never will desert Mr. Micawber.', 'We came, and saw the Medway. My opinion of the coal trade on that river is, that it may require talent, but that it certainly requires capital. Talent, Mr. Micawber has; capital, Mr. Micawber has not. We saw, I think, the greater part of the Medway; and that is my individual conclusion. Being so near here, Mr. Micawber was of opinion that it would be rash not to come on, and see the Cathedral. Firstly, on account of its being so well worth seeing, and our never having seen it; and secondly, on account of the great probability of something turning up in a cathedral town. We have been here, three days. Nothing has, as yet, turned up; and it may not surprise you, my dear Master Copperfield, so much as it would a stranger, to know that we are at present waiting for a remittance from London, to discharge our pecuniary obligations at this hotel. Until the arrival of that remittance, I am cut off from my home (I allude to lodgings in Pentonville), from my boy and girl, and from my twins.', 'And I  said Mr. Micawber, ', 'Yes, ll be, when he leaves Doctor Strong', 'Oh, Miss Shepherd!', 'With no one else?', 'I should have no pleasure in dancing with anyone else.', 'Next time but one, I shall be very glad.', 'I ask an inestimable price for it, Miss Larkins.', 'Indeed! What is that?', 'A flower of yours, that I may treasure it as a miser does gold.', 'You  says Miss Larkins. ', 'Oh! here is my bold friend! Mr. Chestle wants to know you, Mr. Copperfield.', 'I admire your taste, sir, It does you credit. I suppose you don', 'Trotwood, Who do you think is going to be married tomorrow? Someone you admire.', 'Not you, I suppose, Agnes?', 'Not me! Do you hear him, Papa?--The eldest Miss Larkins.', 'To--to Captain Bailey?', 'No; to no Captain. To Mr. Chestle, a hop-grower.', 'Trot, I tell you what, my dear, as this knotty point is still unsettled, and as we must not make a mistake in our decision if we can help it, I think we had better take a little breathing-time. In the meanwhile, you must try to look at it from a new point of view, and not as a schoolboy.', 'I will, aunt.', 'It has occurred to me, that a little change, and a glimpse of life out of doors, may be useful in helping you to know your own mind, and form a cooler judgement. Suppose you were to go down into the old part of the country again, for instance, and see that--that out-of-the-way woman with the savagest of names,', 'Of all things in the world, aunt, I should like it best!', 'Well, that s natural and rational that you should like it. And I am very well persuaded that whatever you do, Trot, will always be natural and rational.', 'I hope so, aunt.', 'Your sister, Betsey Trotwood, would have been as natural and rational a girl as ever breathed. You t you?', 'I hope I shall be worthy of YOU, aunt. That will be enough for me.', 'It t live, or she  (My aunt always excused any weakness of her own in my behalf, by transferring it in this way to my poor mother.) ', 'Pleasantly, I hope, aunt?', 'He  said my aunt, emphatically,  s as like her, as she was that afternoon before she began to fret--bless my heart, he', 'Is he indeed?', 'And he', 'He is very like David!', 'But what I want you to be, Trot, --I don  said my aunt, shaking her cap at me, and clenching her hand.  s what I want you to be. That', 'That you may begin, in a small way, to have a reliance upon yourself, and to act for yourself, I shall send you upon your trip, alone. I did think, once, of Mr. Dick', 'Besides, there', 'Oh, certainly, I intend, Trotwood, to get that done immediately--it really must be done immediately! And then it will go in, you know--and then-- there', 'I am sure I am not like myself when I am away, I seem to want my right hand, when I miss you. Though that s no head in my right hand, and no heart. Everyone who knows you, consults with you, and is guided by you, Agnes.', 'Everyone who knows me, spoils me, I believe,', 'No. It', 'You talk, as if I were the late Miss Larkins.', 'Come! It  I answered, reddening at the recollection of my blue enslaver.  ll let me--even when I come to fall in love in earnest.', 'Why, you have always been in earnest!', 'Oh! that was as a child, or a schoolboy, Times are altering now, and I suppose I shall be in a terrible state of earnestness one day or other. My wonder is, that you are not in earnest yourself, by this time, Agnes.', 'Oh, I know you are not! because if you had been you would have told me. Or at least you would have let me find it out for myself. But there is no one that I know of, who deserves to love you, Agnes. Someone of a nobler character, and more worthy altogether than anyone I have ever seen here, must rise up, before I give my consent. In the time to come, I shall have a wary eye on all admirers; and shall exact a great deal from the successful one, I assure you.', 'Trotwood, there is something that I want to ask you, and that I may not have another opportunity of asking for a long time, perhaps--something I would ask, I think, of no one else. Have you observed any gradual alteration in Papa?', 'Tell me what it is,', 'I think--shall I be quite plain, Agnes, liking him so much?', 'Yes,', 'I think he does himself no good by the habit that has increased upon him since I first came here. He is often very nervous--or I fancy so.', 'It is not fancy,', 'His hand trembles, his speech is not plain, and his eyes look wild. I have remarked that at those times, and when he is least like himself, he is most certain to be wanted on some business.', 'By Uriah,', 'Yes; and the sense of being unfit for it, or of not having understood it, or of having shown his condition in spite of himself, seems to make him so uneasy, that next day he is worse, and next day worse, and so he becomes jaded and haggard. Do not be alarmed by what I say, Agnes, but in this state I saw him, only the other evening, lay down his head upon his desk, and shed tears like a child.', 'I shall not see many more new faces in Trotwood  said the Doctor, warming his hands; ', 'You have said so, any time these ten years, Doctor,', 'But now I mean to do it, My first master will succeed me--I am in earnest at last--so you', 'And to take care, that you', 'I shall have nothing to think of then, but my Dictionary; and this other contract-bargain--Annie.', 'but my Dictionary; and this other contract-bargain--Annie.', 'There is a post come in from India, I observe,', 'By the by! and letters from Mr. Jack Maldon!', 'Indeed! Poor dear Jack! That trying climate!--like living, they tell me, on a sand-heap, underneath a burning-glass! He looked strong, but he wasn  said Mrs. Markleham, with emphasis, and looking round upon us generally, ', 'Do I gather from what you say, ma', 'Ill! My dear sir, he', 'Except well?', 'Except well, indeed! He has had dreadful strokes of the sun, no doubt, and jungle fevers and agues, and every kind of thing you can mention. As to his liver, that, of course, he gave up altogether, when he first went out!', 'Does he say all this?', 'Say? My dear sir, you little know my poor Jack Maldon when you ask that question. Say? Not he. You might drag him at the heels of four wild horses first.', 'Mama!', 'Annie, my dear, once for all, I must really beg that you will not interfere with me, unless it is to confirm what I say. You know as well as I do that your cousin Maldon would be dragged at the heels of any number of wild horses--why should I confine myself to four! I WON s plans.', 'Wickfield  said the Doctor, stroking his face, and looking penitently at his adviser. ', 'And I said abroad. I was the means of sending him abroad. It', 'Oh! Responsibility! Everything was done for the best, my dear Mr. Wickfield; everything was done for the kindest and best, we know. But if the dear fellow can t live there. And if he can ll die there, sooner than he s plans. I know him, and I know he ll overturn the Doctor', 'Well, well, ma  said the Doctor cheerfully, ', 'Why, here, s head,  s pretty plain, poor fellow! His only hope of restoration! But Annie', 'Not now, mama,', 'My dear, you absolutely are, on some subjects, one of the most ridiculous persons in the world, and perhaps the most unnatural to the claims of your own family. We never should have heard of the letter at all, I believe, unless I had asked for it myself. Do you call that confidence, my love, towards Doctor Strong? I am surprised. You ought to know better.', 'Now let us see, where the passage is. "The remembrance of old times, my dearest Annie"--and so forth--it s he? Dear me, Annie, how illegibly your cousin Maldon writes, and how stupid I am! "Doctor," of course. Ah! amiable indeed! Now I have found it. "You may not be surprised to hear, Annie,"--no, to be sure, knowing that he never was really strong; what did I say just now?--"that I have undergone so much in this distant place, as to have decided to leave it at all hazards; on sick leave, if I can; on total resignation, if that is not to be obtained. What I have endured, and do endure here, is insupportable." And but for the promptitude of that best of creatures, it would be insupportable to me to think of.', 'where the passage is. "The remembrance of old times, my dearest Annie"--and so forth--it s he? Dear me, Annie, how illegibly your cousin Maldon writes, and how stupid I am! "Doctor," of course. Ah! amiable indeed! Now I have found it. "You may not be surprised to hear, Annie,"--no, to be sure, knowing that he never was really strong; what did I say just now?--"that I have undergone so much in this distant place, as to have decided to leave it at all hazards; on sick leave, if I can; on total resignation, if that is not to be obtained. What I have endured, and do endure here, is insupportable." And but for the promptitude of that best of creatures, it would be insupportable to me to think of.', 'You are going through, sir?', 'Yes, William, I am going to London. I shall go down into Suffolk afterwards.', 'Shooting, sir?', 'I don  I said, pretending to be undecided,    m told,', 'So I understand,', 'Is Suffolk your county, sir?', 'Yes, Suffolk', 'I', 'And the Punches, There s a good un, is worth his weight in gold. Did you ever breed any Suffolk Punches yourself, sir?', 'N-no, not exactly.', 'Here lm ll pound it, as has bred ', 'em by wholesale.', 'Ain', 'Ain', 'Bred them Suffolk Punches by wholesale?', 'I should think so, There ain t bred, and no sort of dorg. Orses and dorgs is some men re wittles and drink to me--lodging, wife, and children--reading, writing, and Arithmetic--snuff, tobacker, and sleep.', 'That ain', 'Well, if you don  said William, ', 'Well now, what would you like for dinner? Young gentlemen likes poultry in general: have a fowl!', 'Ain  said the waiter. ', 'Do you care for taters? Young gentlemen generally has been overdosed with taters.', 'Steerforth! won', 'You don', 'My God! It', 'I never, never, never was so glad! My dear Steerforth, I am so overjoyed to see you!', 'And I am rejoiced to see you, too! Why, Copperfield, old boy, don', 'Why, Copperfield, old boy, don', 'Why, how do you come to be here?', 'I came here by the Canterbury coach, today. I have been adopted by an aunt down in that part of the country, and have just finished my education there. How do YOU come to be here, Steerforth?', 'Well, I am what they call an Oxford man, that is to say, I get bored to death down there, periodically--and I am on my way now to my mother re a devilish amiable-looking fellow, Copperfield. Just what you used to be, now I look at you! Not altered in the least!', 'I knew you immediately, but you are more easily remembered.', 'Yes, I am on an expedition of duty. My mother lives a little way out of town; and the roads being in a beastly condition, and our house tedious enough, I remained here tonight instead of going on. I have not been in town half-a-dozen hours, and those I have been dozing and grumbling away at the play.', 'I have been at the play, too, At Covent Garden. What a delightful and magnificent entertainment, Steerforth!', 'My dear young Davy, you are a very Daisy. The daisy of the field, at sunrise, is not fresher than you are. I have been at Covent Garden, too, and there never was a more miserable business. Holloa, you sir!', 'Where have you put my friend, Mr. Copperfield?', 'Beg your pardon, sir?', 'Where does he sleep? What', 'Well, sir, Mr. Copperfield is at present in forty-four, sir.', 'And what the devil do you mean, by putting Mr. Copperfield into a little loft over a stable?', 'Why, you see we wasn  returned the waiter, still apologetically, ', 'Of course it would be preferred, And do it at once.', 'Now, Copperfield, I should like to hear what you are doing, and where you are going, and all about you. I feel as if you were my property.', 'As you are in no hurry, then, come home with me to Highgate, and stay a day or two. You will be pleased with my mother--she is a little vain and prosy about me, but that you can forgive her--and she will be pleased with you.', 'I should like to be as sure of that, as you are kind enough to say you are,', 'Oh! everyone who likes me, has a claim on her that is sure to be acknowledged.', 'Then I think I shall be a favourite,', 'Good! Come and prove it. We will go and see the lions for an hour or two--it ll journey out to Highgate by the coach.', 'You  said I, ', 'I take a degree! Not I! my dear Daisy--will you mind my calling you Daisy?', 'Not at all!', 'That  said Steerforth, laughing. ', 'But the fame--', 'You romantic Daisy! why should I trouble myself, that a parcel of heavy-headed fellows may gape and hold up their hands? Let them do it at some other man. There s welcome to it.', 'why should I trouble myself, that a parcel of heavy-headed fellows may gape and hold up their hands? Let them do it at some other man. There s welcome to it.', 'Oh, really? You know how ignorant I am, and that I only ask for information, but isn  ', 'Oh! Yes! That  returned Miss Dartle.  t it, though?--I want to be put right, if I am wrong--isn', 'Really what?', 'Oh! You mean it  returned Miss Dartle.  m very glad to hear it! Now, I know what to do! That', 'And you will be right, My son', 'Should you? Dear me! Conscientious, is he? Really conscientious, now?', 'Yes, I am convinced of it,', 'How very nice! What a comfort! Really conscientious? Then he t be, if he t think how it elevates him in my opinion, to know for certain that he', 'Oh! That bluff fellow! He had a son with him, hadn', 'No. That was his nephew, whom he adopted, though, as a son. He has a very pretty little niece too, whom he adopted as a daughter. In short, his house--or rather his boat, for he lives in one, on dry land--is full of people who are objects of his generosity and kindness. You would be delighted to see that household.', 'Should I? Well, I think I should. I must see what can be done. It would be worth a journey (not to mention the pleasure of a journey with you, Daisy), to see that sort of people together, and to make one of ', 'Oh, but, really? Do tell me. Are they, though?', 'Are they what? And are who what?', 'That sort of people.---Are they really animals and clods, and beings of another order? I want to know SO much.', 'Why, there  said Steerforth, with indifference.  t want to contradict them--but they have not very fine natures, and they may be thankful that, like their coarse rough skins, they are not easily wounded.', 'Really! Well, I don s so consoling! It t feel! Sometimes I have been quite uneasy for that sort of people; but now I shall just dismiss the idea of them, altogether. Live and learn. I had my doubts, I confess, but now they t know, and now I do know, and that shows the advantage of asking--don', 'She is very clever, is she not?', 'Clever! She brings everything to a grindstone,', 'What a remarkable scar that is upon her lip!', 'Why, the fact is, I did that.', 'By an unfortunate accident!', 'No. I was a young boy, and she exasperated me, and I threw a hammer at her. A promising young angel I must have been!', 'She has borne the mark ever since, as you see, and she s. He died one day. My mother, who was then a widow, brought her here to be company to her. She has a couple of thousand pounds of her own, and saves the interest of it every year, to add to the principal. There', 'And I have no doubt she loves you like a brother?', 'Humph! Some brothers are not loved over much; and some love--but help yourself, Copperfield! We', 'It was at Mr. Creakle  said Mrs. Steerforth, as she and I were talking at one table, while they played backgammon at another. ', 'He was very generous and noble to me in those days, I assure you, ma  said I, ', 'He is always generous and noble,', 'It was not a fit school generally for my son, far from it; but there were particular circumstances to be considered at the time, of more importance even than that selection. My son', 'My son  the fond lady went on to say. ', 'He would have risen against all constraint; but he found himself the monarch of the place, and he haughtily determined to be worthy of his station. It was like himself.', 'So my son took, of his own will, and on no compulsion, to the course in which he can always, when it is his pleasure, outstrip every competitor, My son informs me, Mr. Copperfield, that you were quite devoted to him, and that when you met yesterday you made yourself known to him with tears of joy. I should be an affected woman if I made any pretence of being surprised by my son', 'But really, Mr. Copperfield, is it a nickname? And why does he give it you? Is it--eh?--because he thinks you young and innocent? I am so stupid in these things.', 'Oh! Now I am glad to know that! I ask for information, and I am glad to know it. He thinks you young and innocent; and so you are his friend. Well, that', 'Mr. Steerforth will be glad to hear how you have rested, sir.', 'Thank you, very well indeed. Is Mr. Steerforth quite well?', 'Thank you, sir, Mr. Steerforth is tolerably well.', 'Is there anything more I can have the honour of doing for you, sir? The warning-bell will ring at nine; the family take breakfast at half past nine.', 'Nothing, I thank you.', 'I thank YOU, sir, if you please', 'When do you propose to introduce me there, Daisy? I am at your disposal. Make your own arrangements.', 'Why, I was thinking that this evening would be a good time, Steerforth, when they are all sitting round the fire. I should like you to see it when it s such a curious place.', 'So be it! This evening.', 'I shall not give them any notice that we are here, you know, We must take them by surprise.', 'Oh, of course! It  said Steerforth, ', 'Though they ARE that sort of people that you mentioned,', 'Aha! What! you recollect my skirmishes with Rosa, do you? Confound the girl, I am half afraid of her. She', 'Why, yes, I must see Peggotty first of all.', 'Well, Suppose I deliver you up to be cried over for a couple of hours. Is that long enough?', 'I  said Steerforth,  ll produce myself in any state you please, sentimental or comical.', 'Is Mr. Omer at home? I should like to see him, for a moment, if he is.', 'Oh yes, sir, he is at home, the weather don', 'Servant, sir, What can I do for you, sir? You can shake hands with me, Mr. Omer, if you please, You were very good-natured to me once, when I am afraid I didn', 'Was I though? I t remember when. Are you sure it was me?', 'Quite.', 'I think my memory has got as short as my breath, for I don', 'Don t her husband then?', 'Why, Lord bless my soul! you don', 'My mother,', 'To--be--sure, and there was a little child too! There was two parties. The little party was laid along with the other party. Over at Blunderstone it was, of course. Dear me! And how have you been since?', 'Oh! nothing to grumble at, you know, I find my breath gets short, but it seldom gets longer as a man gets older. I take it as it comes, and make the most of it. That t it?', 'Dear me! Yes, to be sure. Two parties! Why, in that very ride, if you s come into the business. And look here! The youngest!', 'Two parties, of course! Ex-actly so! And Joram --the measurement of the dancing child upon the counter--', 'Let me see, Barkis s wife--Peggotty s sister--she had something to do with your family? She was in service there, sure?', 'I believe my breath will get long next, my memory  said Mr. Omer.  ve got a young relation of hers here, under articles to us, that has as elegant a taste in the dress-making business--I assure you I don s a Duchess in England can touch her.', 'Not little Em', 'Em s her name, and she ll believe me, she has such a face of her own that half the women in this town are mad against her.', 'Nonsense, father!', 'My dear, I don s the case with you, but I say that half the women in Yarmouth--ah! and in five mile round--are mad against that girl.', 'Then she should have kept to her own station in life, father, and not have given them any hold to talk about her, and then they couldn', 'Couldn  retorted Mr. Omer.  t have done it! Is that YOUR knowledge of life? What is there that any woman couldn t do--especially on the subject of another woman', 'You see, she hasn t taken kindly to any particular acquaintances and friends, not to mention sweethearts. In consequence, an ill-natured story got about, that Em t you see?--and buy him such-and-such fine things.', 'I assure you, Mr. Omer, she has said so to me, when we were both children.', 'when we were both children.', 'No, father, That', 'So when she got a situation, to keep a fractious old lady company, they didn t stop. At last she came here, apprenticed for three years. Nearly two of ', 'Yes, father, Never say I detracted from her!', 'Very good, That  he added, after a few moments that you may not consider me long-winded as well as short-breathed, I believe that', 'Wouldn  said Mr. Omer, ', 'Is Mr. Barkis at home, ma', 'He  returned Peggotty,  s bad abed with the rheumatics.', 'Don', 'When he', 'Do YOU ever go there, Mrs. Barkis?', 'Because I want to ask a question about a house there, that they call the--what is it?--the Rookery,', 'Peggotty!', 'Barkis will be so glad, that it', 'that it', 'What name was it, as I wrote up in the cart, sir?', 'Ah! Mr. Barkis, we had some grave talks about that matter, hadn', 'I was willin', 'A long time,', 'And I don  said Mr. Barkis. ', 'Yes, very well,', 'It was as true, as turnips is. It was as true, as taxes is. And nothing', 'as taxes is. And nothing', 'Nothing  repeated Mr. Barkis;  s laid up. I', 'I am sorry to hear it, Mr. Barkis.', 'A very poor man, indeed I am,', 'Old clothes,', 'Oh!', 'I wish it was Money, sir,', 'I wish it was, indeed,', 'But it AIN', 'She ll get a dinner today, for company; something good to eat and drink, will you?', 'I have got a trifle of money somewhere about me, my dear, but I ll try and find it when I wake.', 'Of course, You', 'But to bring you so far, and to separate, seems bad companionship, Steerforth.', 'Why, in the name of Heaven, where do you naturally belong? What is "seems", compared to that?', 'What is "seems", compared to that?', 'This is a wild kind of place, Steerforth, is it not?', 'Dismal enough in the dark, and the sea roars as if it were hungry for us. Is that the boat, where I see a light yonder? That', 'And it  he returned. ', 'Mas s Mas', 'Why, that you two gent lmen growed--should come to this here roof tonight, of all nights in my life, is such a thing as never happened afore, I do rightly believe! Em s Mas s friend, my dear! There lman as you ly. He comes to see you, along with Mas s life as ever was or will be, Gorm the t', 'If you two gent lmen growed now, and such gent', 'So th  are! Well said! So th r Davy bor lmen growed--so th', 'If you two gent lmen growed, don ll arks your pardon. Em m a going to tell, and has made off. Would you be so good as look arter her, Mawther, for a minute?', 'If this ain  said Mr. Peggotty, sitting down among us by the fire,   my life, I t say. This here little Em  in a low voice to Steerforth, ', 'the brightest night o m a shellfish--biled too--and more I can ly, sir, --her as you see a blushing here just now--', '--her as you see a blushing here just now--', 'To be sure, That', 'This here little Em  said Mr. Peggotty,  m a ignorant man, but that t my child; I never had one; but I couldn t do it!', 'I quite understand,', 'I know you do, sir, and thankee again. Mas t fully know what she has been, is, and will be, to my loving art. I am rough, sir, I am as rough as a Sea Porkypine; but no one, unless, mayhap, it is a woman, can know, I think, what our little Em  sinking his voice lower yet,  s name ain', 'There was a certain person as had know ly, from the time when her father was drownded; as had seen her constant; when a babby, when a young gal, when a woman. Not much of a person to look at, he warn  said Mr. Peggotty,   my own build--rough--a good deal o -wester in him--wery salt--but, on the whole, a honest sort of a chap, with his art in the right place.', 'What does this here blessed tarpaulin go and do, but he loses that there art of his to our little Em  servant to her, he loses in a great measure his relish for his wittles, and in the long-run he makes it clear to me wot ly was in a fair way of being married. I could wish to see her, at all ewents, under articles to a honest man as had a right to defend her. I don t make no head against, I could go down quieter for thinking "There ly, God bless her, and no wrong can touch my Em', 'Well! I counsels him to speak to Em s big enough, but he t like. So I speak. "What! Him!" says Em ve know s such a good fellow!" I gives her a kiss, and I says no more to her than, "My dear, you re to choose for yourself, you t. But you can both be as you was, and wot I say to you is, Be as you was with her, like a man." He says to me, a-shaking of my hand, "I will!" he says. And he was--honourable and manful--for two year going on, and we was just the same at home here as afore.', 'All of a sudden, one evening--as it might be tonight--comes little Em t so much in that, you  cried Mr. Peggotty, rolling his head in an ecstasy at the idea;  ll be as good a little wife as I can to him, for he s out! You come in! It took place this here present hour; and here ll marry her, the minute she', 'Lord, as if I should do anythink else!--"If you please, I am steadier now, and I have thought better of it, and I s a dear, good fellow!" Then Missis Gummidge, she claps her hands like a play, and you come in. Theer! the murder  said Mr. Peggotty-- s the man that s out of her time.', 'She warn r Davy--when you first come--when I thought what she lmen--like a flower. I r Davy--Oh! most content and cheerful! She lmen--than--she t a gent s many a common man--would say better--what he meant.', 'Mr. Peggotty, you are a thoroughly good fellow, and deserve to be as happy as you are tonight. My hand upon it! Ham, I give you joy, my boy. My hand upon that, too! Daisy, stir the fire, and make it a brisk one! and Mr. Peggotty, unless you can induce your gentle niece to come back (for whom I vacate this seat in the corner), I shall go. Any gap at your fireside on such a night--such a gap least of all--I wouldn', 'A most engaging little Beauty! Well! It s quite a new sensation to mix with them.', 'How fortunate we are, too, to have arrived to witness their happiness in that intended marriage! I never saw people so happy. How delightful to see it, and to be made the sharers in their honest joy, as we have been!', 'That t he?', 'Ah, Steerforth! It s, or humour a love like my old nurse', 'You come upon me, like a reproachful ghost!', 'I was obliged to announce myself, somehow, Have I called you down from the stars?', 'No, No.', 'Up from anywhere, then?', 'I was looking at the pictures in the fire,', 'But you are spoiling them for me,', 'You would not have seen them, I detest this mongrel time, neither day nor night. How late you are! Where have you been?', 'I have been taking leave of my usual walk,', 'And I have been sitting here, thinking that all the people we found so glad on the night of our coming down, might--to judge from the present wasted air of the place--be dispersed, or dead, or come to I don', 'My dear Steerforth, what is the matter?', 'I wish with all my soul I had been better guided! I wish with all my soul I could guide myself better!', 'It would be better to be this poor Peggotty, or his lout of a nephew, than to be myself, twenty times richer and twenty times wiser, and be the torment to myself that I have been, in this Devil', 'Tut, it  he replied.  t care", and became food for lions--a grander kind of going to the dogs, I suppose. What old women call the horrors, have been creeping over me from head to foot. I have been afraid of myself.', 't care", and became food for lions--a grander kind of going to the dogs, I suppose. What old women call the horrors, have been creeping over me from head to foot. I have been afraid of myself.', 'You are afraid of nothing else, I think,', 'Perhaps not, and yet may have enough to be afraid of too, Well! So it goes by! I am not about to be hipped again, David; but I tell you, my good fellow, once more, that it would have been well for me (and for more than me) if I had had a steadfast and judicious father!', 'Well! So it goes by! I am not about to be hipped again, David; but I tell you, my good fellow, once more, that it would have been well for me (and for more than me) if I had had a steadfast and judicious father!', 'So much for that! Why, being gone, I am a man again," like Macbeth. And now for dinner! If I have not (Macbeth-like) broken up the feast with most admired disorder, Daisy.', 'But where are they all, I wonder!', 'God knows, After strolling to the ferry looking for you, I strolled in here and found the place deserted. That set me thinking, and you found me thinking.', 'And so, we abandon this buccaneer life tomorrow, do we?', 'So we agreed, And our places by the coach are taken, you know.', 'Ay! there  said Steerforth. ', 'As long as the novelty should last,', 'Like enough, though there', 'Mr. Peggotty says you are a wonder,', 'A nautical phenomenon, eh?', 'Indeed he does, and you know how truly; I know how ardent you are in any pursuit you follow, and how easily you can master it. And that amazes me most in you, Steerforth--that you should be contented with such fitful uses of your powers.', 'Contented? I am never contented, except with your freshness, my gentle Daisy. As to fitfulness, I have never learnt the art of binding myself to any of the wheels on which the Ixions of these days are turning round and round. I missed it somehow in a bad apprenticeship, and now don', 'What an extraordinary fellow you are, Steerforth! When you may never care to come near the place again!', 'I don  he returned.   walking me briskly on, ', 'Now I understand you, Steerforth! You pretend to have bought it for yourself, but you have really done so to confer a benefit on him. I might have known as much at first, knowing you. My dear kind Steerforth, how can I tell you what I think of your generosity?', 'Tush! The less said, the better.', 'Didn  cried I,  t I say that there was not a joy, or sorrow, or any emotion of such honest hearts that was indifferent to you?', 'Aye, aye, you told me all that. There let it rest. We have said enough!', 'She must be newly rigged, and I shall leave Littimer behind to see it done, that I may know she is quite complete. Did I tell you Littimer had come down?', 'No.', 'Oh yes! came down this morning, with a letter from my mother.', 'Oh no! Nothing of the sort! Yes. He is come down, that man of mine.', 'The same as ever?', 'The same as ever, Distant and quiet as the North Pole. He shall see to the boat being fresh named. She ll have her christened again.', 'By what name?', 'The "Little Em', 'But see here, where the original little Em s a true knight. He never leaves her!', 'That is a black shadow to be following the girl, what does it mean?', 'She must have it in her mind to beg of them, I think,', 'A beggar would be no novelty, but it is a strange thing that the beggar should take that shape tonight.', 'Why?', 'For no better reason, truly, than because I was thinking, of something like it, when it came by. Where the Devil did it come from, I wonder!', 'From the shadow of this wall, I think,', 'It  he returned, looking over his shoulder. ', 'I beg your pardon, sir. Miss Mowcher is down here.', 'Who?', 'Miss Mowcher, sir.', 'Why, what on earth does she do here?', 'It appears to be her native part of the country, sir. She informs me that she makes one of her professional visits here, every year, sir. I met her in the street this afternoon, and she wished to know if she might have the honour of waiting on you after dinner, sir.', 'Do you know the Giantess in question, Daisy?', 'Then you shall know her, for she is one of the seven wonders of the world. When Miss Mowcher comes, show her in.', 'Miss Mowcher!', 'What! My flower! You ll be bound. Oh, you m another, ain d have betted a hundred pound to five, now, that you wouldn t you? Bless you, man alive, I m here and there, and where not, like the conjurer s handkercher. Talking of handkerchers--and talking of ladies--what a comfort you are to your blessed mother, ain t say which!', 'You ll be bound. Oh, you m another, ain d have betted a hundred pound to five, now, that you wouldn t you? Bless you, man alive, I m here and there, and where not, like the conjurer s handkercher. Talking of handkerchers--and talking of ladies--what a comfort you are to your blessed mother, ain t say which!', 'Oh my stars and what  she went on, clapping a hand on each of her little knees, and glancing shrewdly at me,  m of too full a habit, that d think I was a fine woman, wouldn', 'I should think that, wherever I saw you,', 'Go along, you dog, do! and don s last week--THERE S a man! How HE wears! and his wig too, for he s a pleasant wretch, but he wants principle.', 'What were you doing for Lady Mithers?', 'That  she retorted, tapping her nose again, screwing up her face, and twinkling her eyes like an imp of supernatural intelligence.  d like to know whether I stop her hair from falling off, or dye it, or touch up her complexion, or improve her eyebrows, wouldn s name was?', 'No,', 'It was Walker, my sweet pet, and he came of a long line of Walkers, that I inherit all the Hookey estates from.', 'Who', 'Mr. Copperfield, he wants to know you.', 'Well, then, he shall! I thought he looked as if he did! Face like a peach! Quite tempting! I m sure.', 'Face like a peach! Quite tempting! I m sure.', 'Oh, my goodness, how polite we are! What a world of gammon and spinnage it is, though, ain', 'What a world of gammon and spinnage it is, though, ain', 'What do you mean, Miss Mowcher?', 'Ha! ha! ha! What a refreshing set of humbugs we are, to be sure, ain  replied that morsel of a woman, feeling in the bag with her head on one side and her eye in the air.   taking something out.  s nails. Prince Alphabet turned topsy-turvy, I call him, for his name', 'The Russian Prince is a client of yours, is he?', 'I believe you, my pet, I keep his nails in order for him. Twice a week! Fingers and toes.', 'He pays well, I hope?', 'Pays, as he speaks, my dear child--through the nose, None of your close shavers the Prince ain d say so, if you saw his moustachios. Red by nature, black by art.', 'By your art, of course,', 'Oh, you t you? I said, what a set of humbugs we were in general, and I showed you the scraps of the Prince s nails do more for me in private families of the genteel sort, than all my talents put together. I always carry  re the best introduction. If Miss Mowcher cuts the Prince em away to the young ladies. They put  s nails!', 'Well, well! this is not business. Come, Steerforth, let', 'If either of you saw my ankles, say so, and I', 'I did not,', 'I did not,', 'Well then, I', 'You  said Miss Mowcher, after a brief inspection.  d be as bald as a friar on the top of your head in twelve months, but for me. Just half a minute, my young friend, and we', 'You ll give you a polishing that shall keep your curls on for the next ten years!', 'There s son, You know Charley?', 'A little,', 'What a man HE is! THERE s legs, if they were only a pair (which they ain d defy competition. Would you believe he tried to do without me--in the Life-Guards, too?', 'Mad!', 'It looks like it. However, mad or sane, he tried, What does he do, but, lo and behold you, he goes into a perfumer', 'Charley does?', 'Charley does. But they haven', 'What is it? Something to drink?', 'To drink? To doctor his own moustachios with, you know. There was a woman in the shop--elderly female--quite a Griffin--who had never even heard of it by name. "Begging pardon, sir," said the Griffin to Charley, "it  continued Miss Mowcher, rubbing all the time as busily as ever,  s the word, my dear boy--never mind!', 'In what way do you mean? In the rouge way?', 'Put this and that together, my tender pupil, work it by the rule of Secrets in all trades, and the product will give you the desired result. I say I do a little in that way myself. One Dowager, SHE calls it lip-salve. Another, SHE calls it gloves. Another, SHE calls it tucker-edging. Another, SHE calls it a fan. I call it whatever THEY call it. I supply it for  d as soon think of laying it on, before a whole drawing-room, as before me. And when I wait upon  ll say to me sometimes--WITH IT ON--thick, and no mistake--"How am I looking, Mowcher? Am I pale?" Ha! ha! ha! ha! Isn', 'Ah! Such things are not much in demand hereabouts. That sets me off again! I haven ve been here, jemmy.', 'No?', 'Not the ghost of one,', 'We could show her the substance of one, I think? Eh, Daisy?', 'Yes, indeed,', 'Aha? s. ', 'A sister of yours, Mr. Copperfield? Aye, aye?', 'No, Nothing of the sort. On the contrary, Mr. Copperfield used--or I am much mistaken--to have a great admiration for her.', 'Why, hasn  returned Miss Mowcher. ', 'No, Miss Mowcher, Her name is Emily.', 'Aha? Umph? What a rattle I am! Mr. Copperfield, ain', 'Well said! Hear, hear, hear! Now I', 'Oh! And that  she exclaimed, trimming his whiskers with a little restless pair of scissors, that went glancing round his head in all directions.  t it? Ah! What s enticing; I hate her with an E, because she s Emily, and she lives in the east? Ha! ha! ha! Mr. Copperfield, ain', 'There! If ever any scapegrace was trimmed and touched up to perfection, you are, Steerforth. If I understand any noddle in the world, I understand yours. Do you hear me when I tell you that, my darling? I understand yours, Now you may mizzle, jemmy (as we say at Court), and if Mr. Copperfield will take the chair I', 'What do you say, Daisy? Will you be improved?', 'Thank you, Miss Mowcher, not this evening.', 'Don  returned the little woman, looking at me with the aspect of a connoisseur; ', 'Thank you, some other time.', 'Have it carried half a quarter of an inch towards the temple, We can do it in a fortnight.', 'No, I thank you. Not at present.', 'Go in for a tip, No? Let', 'The fee, is--', 'Five bob, and dirt cheap, my chicken. Ain', 'That  observed Miss Mowcher, standing at the chair again, and replacing in the bag a miscellaneous collection of little objects she had emptied out of it.  t do to be like long Ned Beadwood, when they took him to church "to marry him to somebody", as he says, and left the bride behind. Ha! ha! ha! A wicked rascal, Ned, but droll! Now, I know I s all the fault of you two wretches. I forgive you! "Bob swore!"--as the Englishman said for "Good night", when he first learnt French, and thought it so like English. "Bob swore," my ducks!', 'Why, you see, Mas  he rejoined, in a hesitating manner,  ly, she un in here.', 'I should have thought, that that was a reason for your being in here too, Ham.', 'Well, Mas t would be, but look r Davy, It ly knowed once, and doen', 'but look r Davy, It ly knowed once, and doen', 'It r Davy, as is trod under foot by all the town. Up street and down street. The mowld o t hold any that the folk shrink away from, more.', 'Did I see her tonight, Ham, on the sand, after we met you?', 'Keeping us in sight? It r Davy. Not that I know ly ly, Em s sake, have a woman r Davy, fur to hear!', 'They were indeed, Ham. What did Em   ly, "Martha, is it you? Oh, Martha, can it be you?"--for they had sat at work together, many a day, at Mr. Omer', 'I recollect her now! I recollect her quite well!', 'Martha Endell, Two or three year older than Em', 'I never heard her name, I didn', 'For the matter o r Davy, all most in them words, "Em ly, for Christ s heart towards me. I was once like you!" She wanted to speak to Em ly couldn t--no, Mas  said Ham, with great earnestness,  t, kind-natur s wrecked in the sea.', 'So Em  he pursued,   winder to bring here. "Show that," she says, "to my aunt, Mrs. Barkis, and she r Davy, and asks me to bring her. What can I do? She doen t deny her, when the tears is on her face.', 'And if I could deny her when the tears was on her face, Mas  said Ham, tenderly adjusting it on the rough palm of his hand,   said Ham, thoughtfully looking on it.  ly my dear.', 'Martha wants, to go to London.', 'Why to London?', 'Better there than here, s, though she did not move. ', 'What will she do there?', 'She will try to do well, ly.  t know what she has said to us. Does he--do they--aunt?', 'I  said Martha,  ll help me away. I never can do worse than I have done here. I may do better. Oh! take me out of these streets, where the whole town knows me from a child!', 'take me out of these streets, where the whole town knows me from a child!', 'It ly, I haven t yourn, my dear. It ain', 'Doen ly! Doen t ought to cry so, pretty!', 'Oh, Ham! I am not so good a girl as I ought to be! I know I have not the thankful heart, sometimes, I ought to have!', 'Yes, yes, you have, I', 'No! no! no! ly, sobbing, and shaking her head. ', 'I try your love too much. I know I do! I', 'You always make me so, my dear! I am happy in the sight of you. I am happy, all day long, in the thoughts of you.', 'Ah! that  she cried. ', 'Poor little tender-heart, Martha has overset her, altogether.', 'Please, aunt, ly, ', 'Oh, pray, aunt, try to help me! Ham, dear, try to help me! Mr. David, for the sake of old times, do, please, try to help me! I want to be a better girl than I am. I want to feel a hundred times more thankful than I do. I want to feel more, what a blessed thing it is to be the wife of a good man, and to lead a peaceful life. Oh me, oh me! Oh my heart, my heart!', 'Do you stay long here, Littimer?', 'No, sir, probably not very long, sir.', 'He can hardly say, just now, He knows what he has to do, and he', 'That I am sure he will,', 'Find a voice, David. What about that letter you were speaking of at breakfast?', 'Oh! It', 'And what does she say, requiring consideration?', 'Why, she reminds me, Steerforth, that I came out on this expedition to look about me, and to think a little.', 'Which, of course, you have done?', 'Indeed I can', 'Well! look about you now, and make up for your negligence, Look to the right, and you ll see the same. Look to the front, and you', 'What says our aunt on the subject? Does she suggest anything?', 'Why, yes, She asks me, here, if I think I should like to be a proctor? What do you think of it?', 'Well, I don  replied Steerforth, coolly. ', 'What is a proctor, Steerforth?', 'Why, he is a sort of monkish attorney, He is, to some faded courts held in Doctors s Churchyard--what solicitors are to the courts of law and equity. He is a functionary whose existence, in the natural course of things, would have terminated about two hundred years ago. I can tell you best what he is, by telling you what Doctors s a little out-of-the-way place, where they administer what is called ecclesiastical law, and play all kinds of tricks with obsolete old monsters of acts of Parliament, which three-fourths of the world know nothing about, and the other fourth supposes to have been dug up, in a fossil state, in the days of the Edwards. It s wills and people', 'Nonsense, Steerforth! You don', 'I don  he returned;   Commons. You shall go there one day, and find them blundering through half the nautical terms in Young s case, or contrariwise. They are like actors: now a man s one thing, now he s something else, change and change about; but it', 'But advocates and proctors are not one and the same? Are they?', 'No, the advocates are civilians--men who have taken a doctor  Commons kindly, David. They plume them-selves on their gentility there, I can tell you, if that', 'That  said Steerforth, when I mentioned it;   Commons.', 'So you have left Mr. Dick behind, aunt? I am sorry for that. Ah, Janet, how do you do?', 'I am sorry for it, too, I have had no peace of mind, Trot, since I have been here.', 'I am convinced, that Dick  said my aunt, with emphasis,  clock. A cold feeling came over me from head to foot, and I know it was a donkey!', 'It was a donkey, and it was the one with the stumpy tail which that Murdering sister of a woman rode, when she came to my house. If there is any Donkey in Dover, whose audacity it is harder to me to bear than another  said my aunt, striking the table, ', 'is the animal!', 'I suppose this unfortunate fowl was born and brought up in a cellar, and never took the air except on a hackney coach-stand. I hope the steak may be beef, but I don s genuine in the place, in my opinion, but the dirt.', 'Don', 'Certainly not, It would be no pleasure to a London tradesman to sell anything which was what he pretended it was.', 'Well, Trot, what do you think of the proctor plan? Or have you not begun to think about it yet?', 'I have thought a good deal about it, my dear aunt, and I have talked a good deal about it with Steerforth. I like it very much indeed. I like it exceedingly.', 'Come! That', 'I have only one difficulty, aunt.', 'Say what it is, Trot,', 'Why, I want to ask, aunt, as this seems, from what I understand, to be a limited profession, whether my entrance into it would not be very expensive?', 'It will cost, to article you, just a thousand pounds.', 'Now, my dear aunt, I am uneasy in my mind about that. It', 'Trot, my child, if I have any object in life, it is to provide for your being a good, a sensible, and a happy man. I am bent upon it--so is Dick. I should like some people that I know to hear Dick s intellect, except myself!', 'It --here to my surprise she hesitated, and was confused--', 'All is agreed and understood between us, now, Trot, and we need talk of this no more. Give me a kiss, and we', 'and we need talk of this no more. Give me a kiss, and we', 'Trot! My dear Trot! I don', 'Don  said I.  s nothing to be afraid of. Step into a shop, and I', 'No, no, child! Don', 'Good Heaven, aunt! He is nothing but a sturdy beggar.', 'You don  replied my aunt.  t know who he is! You don', 'Don  said my aunt, as I turned my head indignantly,  s Churchyard.', 'Wait for you?', 'Yes, I must go alone. I must go with him.', 'With him, aunt? This man?', 'I am in my senses, and I tell you I must. Get me a coach!', 'Mr. Spenlow am, it s close by, and I', 'And so, Mr. Copperfield, you think of entering into our profession? I casually mentioned to Miss Trotwood, when I had the pleasure of an interview with her the other day, that there was a vacancy here. Miss Trotwood was good enough to mention that she had a nephew who was her peculiar care, and for whom she was seeking to provide genteelly in life. That nephew, I believe, I have now the pleasure of', 'Oh surely! surely! We always, in this house, propose a month--an initiatory month. I should be happy, myself, to propose two months--three--an indefinite period, in fact--but I have a partner. Mr. Jorkins.', 'And the premium, sir, is a thousand pounds?', 'And the premium, Stamp included, is a thousand pounds, As I have mentioned to Miss Trotwood, I am actuated by no mercenary considerations; few men are less so, I believe; but Mr. Jorkins has his opinions on these subjects, and I am bound to respect Mr. Jorkins', 'I suppose, sir, that it is not the custom here, if an articled clerk were particularly useful, and made himself a perfect master of his profession I suppose it is not the custom, in the later years of his time, to allow him any--', 'No. I will not say what consideration I might give to that point myself, Mr. Copperfield, if I were unfettered. Mr. Jorkins is immovable.', 'I have not been here a week tomorrow, without considering that too, my dear, There is a furnished little set of chambers to be let in the Adelphi, Trot, which ought to suit you to a marvel.', 'Why, this is the very thing, aunt!', 'Then come, We em.', 'Let us see these chambers of yours, if you please, ma', 'For this gentleman?', 'Yes, for my nephew,', 'And a sweet set they is for sich!', 'Is it the last occupant', 'Yes, it is, ma', 'What', 'Hey! What did he die of?', 'Well, ma  said Mrs. Crupp, in confidence. ', 'Smoke? You don', 'No, ma  returned Mrs. Crupp. ', 'That', 'No, indeed,', 'My dear Steerforth, I began to think I should never see you again!', 'I was carried off, by force of arms, the very next morning after I got home. Why, Daisy, what a rare old bachelor you are here!', 'But you shall have some breakfast! and Mrs. Crupp shall make you some fresh coffee, and I s Dutch-oven, that I have got here.', 'No, no! Don t! I am going to breakfast with one of these fellows who is at the Piazza Hotel, in Covent Garden.', 'But you', 'I can s nothing I should like better, but I must remain with these two fellows. We are all three off together tomorrow morning.', 'Then bring them here to dinner, Do you think they would come?', 'Oh! they would come fast enough, but we should inconvenience you. You had better come and dine with us somewhere.', 'A man might get on very well here, Mr. Copperfield,', 'It  said I, ', 'I hope you have both brought appetites with you?', 'Upon my honour, town seems to sharpen a man', 'Steerforth--you', 'Woman! t allow it. I said it was not a respectful way of proposing the toast, and I would never permit that toast to be drunk in my house otherwise than as   I was very high with him, mainly I think because I saw Steerforth and Grainger laughing at me--or at him--or at both of us. He said a man was not to be dictated to. I said a man was. He said a man was not to be insulted, then. I said he was right there--never under my roof, where the Lares were sacred, and the laws of hospitality paramount. He said it was no derogation from a man', 'Agnes! Lorblessmer! Agnes!', 'Hush! Pray! You disturb the company. Look at the stage!', 'Agnes! I renorwell.', 'Yes, yes. Do not mind me, Trotwood, Listen! Are you going away soon?', 'Amigoarawaysoo?', 'Yes.', 'I know you will do as I ask you, if I tell you I am very earnest in it. Go away now, Trotwood, for my sake, and ask your friends to take you home.', 'Good night!', 'T. Copperfield, Esquire,', 'If it had been anyone but you, Agnes, I should not have minded it half so much. But that it should have been you who saw me! I almost wish I had been dead, first.', 'Sit down, Don', 'Ah, Agnes! You are my good Angel!', 'Yes, Agnes, my good Angel! Always my good Angel!', 'If I were, indeed, Trotwood, there is one thing that I should set my heart on very much.', 'On warning you, against your bad Angel.', 'My dear Agnes, if you mean Steerforth--', 'I do, Trotwood, Then, Agnes, you wrong him very much. He my bad Angel, or anyone', 'I do not judge him from what I saw of you the other night,', 'From what, then?', 'From many things--trifles in themselves, but they do not seem to me to be so, when they are put together. I judge him, partly from your account of him, Trotwood, and your character, and the influence he has over you.', 'It is very bold in me, who have lived in such seclusion, and can know so little of the world, to give you my advice so confidently, or even to have this strong opinion. But I know in what it is engendered, Trotwood,--in how true a remembrance of our having grown up together, and in how true an interest in all relating to you. It is that which makes me bold. I am certain that what I say is right. I am quite sure it is. I feel as if it were someone else speaking to you, and not I, when I caution you that you have made a dangerous friend.', 'I am not so unreasonable as to expect, that you will, or that you can, at once, change any sentiment that has become a conviction to you; least of all a sentiment that is rooted in your trusting disposition. You ought not hastily to do that. I only ask you, Trotwood, if you ever think of me--I mean, as often as you think of me--to think of what I have said. Do you forgive me for all this?', 'I will forgive you, Agnes, when you come to do Steerforth justice, and to like him as well as I do.', 'Not until then?', 'And when, Agnes, will you forgive me the other night?', 'When I recall it,', 'You must not forget, that you are always to tell me, not only when you fall into trouble, but when you fall in love. Who has succeeded to Miss Larkins, Trotwood?', 'No one, Agnes.', 'Someone, Trotwood,', 'No, Agnes, upon my word! There is a lady, certainly, at Mrs. Steerforth t adore her.', 'Uriah Heep? No. Is he in London?', 'He comes to the office downstairs, every day, He was in London a week before me. I am afraid on disagreeable business, Trotwood.', 'On some business that makes you uneasy, Agnes, I see, What can that be?', 'I believe he is going to enter into partnership with papa.', 'What? Uriah? That mean, fawning fellow, worm himself into such promotion! Have you made no remonstrance about it, Agnes? Consider what a connexion it is likely to be. You must speak out. You must not allow your father to take such a mad step. You must prevent it, Agnes, while there', 'You remember our last conversation about papa? It was not long after that--not more than two or three days--when he gave me the first intimation of what I tell you. It was sad to see him struggling between his desire to represent it to me as a matter of choice on his part, and his inability to conceal that it was forced upon him. I felt very sorry.', 'Forced upon him, Agnes! Who forces it upon him?', 'Uriah, s hesitation,  s weaknesses, fostered them, and taken advantage of them, until--to say all that I mean in a word, Trotwood,--until papa is afraid of him.', 'His ascendancy over papa, is very great. He professes humility and gratitude--with truth, perhaps: I hope so--but his position is really one of power, and I fear he makes a hard use of his power.', 'At the time I speak of, as the time when papa spoke to me, he had told papa that he was going away; that he was very sorry, and unwilling to leave, but that he had better prospects. Papa was very much depressed then, and more bowed down by care than ever you or I have seen him; but he seemed relieved by this expedient of the partnership, though at the same time he seemed hurt by it and ashamed of it.', 'And how did you receive it, Agnes?', 'I did, Trotwood, what I hope was right. Feeling sure that it was necessary for papa  cried Agnes, putting her hands before her face, as her tears started on it,  s enemy, instead of his loving child. For I know how he has altered, in his devotion to me. I know how he has narrowed the circle of his sympathies and duties, in the concentration of his whole mind upon me. I know what a multitude of things he has shut out for my sake, and how his anxious thoughts of me have shadowed his life, and weakened his strength and energy, by turning them always upon one idea. If I could ever set this right! If I could ever work out his restoration, as I have so innocently been the cause of his decline!', 'We are not likely to remain alone much longer, and while I have an opportunity, let me earnestly entreat you, Trotwood, to be friendly to Uriah. Don t resent (as I think you have a general disposition to do) what may be uncongenial to you in him. He may not deserve it, for we know no certain ill of him. In any case, think first of papa and me!', 'Indeed! You are too young to have been at school with Mr. Henry Spiker?', 'Oh, I don  I returned. ', 'Oh! Aye, aye! Indeed! Possibly.', 'Possibly.', 'If it  said I, glancing towards him, ', 'Oh yes. Traddles is a good fellow, Traddles is quite a good fellow.', 'It', 'It is really, quite a coincidence, that Traddles should be here at all: as Traddles was only invited this morning, when the place at table, intended to be occupied by Mrs. Henry Spiker s brother, Mr. Copperfield.', 'Traddles, is a young man reading for the bar. Yes. He is quite a good fellow--nobody', 'Is he his own enemy?', 'Well, I should say he was one of those men who stand in their own light. Yes, I should say he would never, for example, be worth five hundred pound. Traddles was recommended to me by a professional friend. Oh yes. Yes. He has a kind of talent for drawing briefs, and stating a case in writing, plainly. I am able to throw something in Traddles', 'I confess I am of Mrs. Waterbrook  said Mr. Waterbrook, with his wine-glass at his eye. ', 'Oh! There is nothing, s aunt,  s beau-ideal of--of all that sort of thing, speaking generally. There are some low minds (not many, I am happy to believe, but there are some) that would prefer to do what I should call bow down before idols. Positively Idols! Before service, intellect, and so on. But these are intangible points. Blood is not so. We see Blood in a nose, and we know it. We meet with it in a chin, and we say, "There it is! That', 'Oh, you know, deuce take it, we can s delightful to reflect that they em! Myself, I d be picked up by a man who hadn', 'That affair of the first bond for four thousand five hundred pounds has not taken the course that was expected, Spiker,', 'Do you mean the D. of A.', 'The C. of B.', 'When the question was referred to Lord--I needn', 'I understand, N.', 'Lord bless my soul!', 'Money, or no release," The next in reversion--you understand me?', 'K.,', '--K. then positively refused to sign. He was attended at Newmarket for that purpose, and he point-blank refused to do it.', 'So the matter rests at this hour, Our friend Waterbrook will excuse me if I forbear to explain myself generally, on account of the magnitude of the interests involved.', 'Oh, really, Master Copperfield, I beg your pardon, Mister Copperfield, but the other comes so natural, I don', 'There is no constraint in the case, Will you come?', 'I should like to, very much,', 'Well, then, come along!', 'Oh, really, Master Copperfield,--I mean Mister Copperfield, to see you waiting upon me is what I never could have expected! But, one way and another, so many things happen to me which I never could have expected, I am sure, in my umble station, that it seems to rain blessings on my ed. You have heard something, I des-say, of a change in my expectations, Master Copperfield,--I should say, Mister Copperfield?', 'You have heard something, I des-say, of a change in my expectations, Master Copperfield,--I should say, Mister Copperfield?', 'Yes, something.', 'Ah! I thought Miss Agnes would know of it! I', 'What a prophet you have shown yourself, Mister Copperfield! Dear me, what a prophet you have proved yourself to be! Don s business, and perhaps it might be Wickfield and Heep? You may not recollect it; but when a person is umble, Master Copperfield, a person treasures such things up!', 'I recollect talking about it, though I certainly did not think it very likely then. Oh! who would have thought it likely, Mister Copperfield! I am sure I didn', 'But the umblest persons, Master Copperfield, may be the instruments of good. I am glad to think I have been the instrument of good to Mr. Wickfield, and that I may be more so. Oh what a worthy man he is, Mister Copperfield, but how imprudent he has been!', 'may be the instruments of good. I am glad to think I have been the instrument of good to Mr. Wickfield, and that I may be more so. Oh what a worthy man he is, Mister Copperfield, but how imprudent he has been!', 'I am sorry to hear it, on all accounts.', 'Decidedly so, Mister Copperfield, On all accounts. Miss Agnes t remember your own eloquent expressions, Master Copperfield; but I remember how you said one day that everybody must admire her, and how I thanked you for it! You have forgot that, I have no doubt, Master Copperfield?', 'No,', 'Oh how glad I am you have not! To think that you should be the first to kindle the sparks of ambition in my umble breast, and that you', 'So, Mr. Wickfield, who is worth five hundred of you--or me has been imprudent, has he, Mr. Heep?', 'Oh, very imprudent indeed, Master Copperfield, Oh, very much so! But I wish you s like old times.', 'Well! Uriah,', 'Thank you, Thank you, Master Copperfield! It', 'About Mr. Wickfield,', 'Oh! Yes, truly, Ah! Great imprudence, Master Copperfield. It t touch upon, to any soul but you. Even to you I can only touch upon it, and no more. If anyone else had been in my place during the last few years, by this time he would have had Mr. Wickfield (oh, what a worthy man he is, Master Copperfield, too!) under his thumb. Un--der--his thumb,', 'Oh, dear, yes, Master Copperfield, there t know what at all. Mr. Wickfield knows it. I am the umble instrument of umbly serving him, and he puts me on an eminence I hardly could have hoped to reach. How thankful should I be!', 'Master Copperfield, but am I keeping you up?', 'You are not keeping me up. I generally go to bed late.', 'Thank you, Master Copperfield! I have risen from my umble station since first you used to address me, it is true; but I am umble still. I hope I never shall be otherwise than umble. You will not think the worse of my umbleness, if I make a little confidence to you, Master Copperfield? Will you?', 'Oh no,', 'Thank you! Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield-- Well, Uriah?', 'Oh, how pleasant to be called Uriah, spontaneously! You thought her looking very beautiful tonight, Master Copperfield?', 'I thought her looking as she always does: superior, in all respects, to everyone around her,', 'Oh, thank you! It  he cried. ', 'Not at all, There is no reason why you should thank me.', 'Why that, Master Copperfield, is, in fact, the confidence that I am going to take the liberty of reposing. Umble as I am, umble as my mother is, and lowly as our poor but honest roof has ever been, the image of Miss Agnes (I don', 'umble as my mother is, and lowly as our poor but honest roof has ever been, the image of Miss Agnes (I don', 'Oh no, Master Copperfield! oh dear, no! Not to anyone but you. You see I am only just emerging from my lowly station. I rest a good deal of hope on her observing how useful I am to her father (for I trust to be very useful to him indeed, Master Copperfield), and how I smooth the way for him, and keep him straight. She', 'If you  he pursued,  t wish to make unpleasantness. I know what a friendly heart you s a song that says, "I', 'There  Uriah proceeded, in his slimy way, as I sat gazing at him, with this thought in my mind.  m so much obliged to you for this confidence! Oh, it t think, to know that you understand our situation, and are certain (as you wouldn', 'Dear me! it s almost half past one!', 'Dear me! The ouse that I am stopping at--a sort of a private hotel and boarding ouse, Master Copperfield, near the New River ed--will have gone to bed these two hours.', 'I am sorry, that there is only one bed here, and that I--', 'Oh, don  he rejoined ecstatically, drawing up one leg. ', 'If it comes to that, pray take my bed, and I', 'I, have seen Mr. Copperfield before.', 'I am glad to find, Copperfield, that you and Miss Murdstone are already acquainted.', 'Mr. Copperfield and myself, are connexions. We were once slightly acquainted. It was in his childish days. Circumstances have separated us since. I should not have known him.', 'Miss Murdstone has had the goodness, to accept the office--if I may so describe it--of my daughter Dora', 'David Copperfield, A word.', 'David Copperfield, I need not enlarge upon family circumstances. They are not a tempting subject. Far from it, ma', 'Far from it, I do not wish to revive the memory of past differences, or of past outrages. I have received outrages from a person--a female I am sorry to say, for the credit of my sex--who is not to be mentioned without scorn and disgust; and therefore I would rather not mention her.', 'David Copperfield, I shall not attempt to disguise the fact, that I formed an unfavourable opinion of you in your childhood. It may have been a mistaken one, or you may have ceased to justify it. That is not in question between us now. I belong to a family remarkable, I believe, for some firmness; and I am not the creature of circumstance or change. I may have my opinion of you. You may have your opinion of me.', 'But it is not necessary, that these opinions should come into collision here. Under existing circumstances, it is as well on all accounts that they should not. As the chances of life have brought us together again, and may bring us together on other occasions, I would say, let us meet here as distant acquaintances. Family circumstances are a sufficient reason for our only meeting on that footing, and it is quite unnecessary that either of us should make the other the subject of remark. Do you approve of this?', 'Miss Murdstone, I think you and Mr. Murdstone used me very cruelly, and treated my mother with great unkindness. I shall always think so, as long as I live. But I quite agree in what you propose.', 'You--are--out early, Miss Spenlow,', 'It  she replied,   (She laughed, here, in the most melodious manner.)  t practise, I must do something. So I told papa last night I must come out. Besides, it t you think so?', 'Do you mean a compliment? or that the weather has really changed?', 'You have just come home from Paris,', 'Yes, Have you ever been there?', 'No.', 'Oh! I hope you', 'You are not very intimate with Miss Murdstone, are you? My pet.', 'No, Not at all so.', 'She is a tiresome creature, I can t want a protector. Jip can protect me a great deal better than Miss Murdstone,--can', 'Papa calls her my confidential friend, but I am sure she is no such thing--is she, Jip? We are not going to confide in any such cross people, Jip and I. We mean to bestow our confidence where we like, and to find out our own friends, instead of having them found out for us--don', 'It is very hard, because we have not a kind Mama, that we are to have, instead, a sulky, gloomy old thing like Miss Murdstone, always following us about--isn t be confidential, and we ll tease her, and not please her--won', 'Cheer up, sir, I can m a mother myself.', 'Come, sir, Excuse me. I know what it is, sir. There', 'Mrs. Crupp?', 'Oh, bless you! Keep a good heart, sir! Never say die, sir! If She don s a many as will. You are a young gentleman to be smiled on, Mr. Copperfull, and you must learn your walue, sir.', 'What makes you suppose there is any young lady in the case, Mrs. Crupp?', 'Mr. Copperfull, I', 'When the present set were took for you by your dear aunt, Mr. Copperfull, my remark were, I had now found summun I could care for. "Thank Ev t eat enough, sir, nor yet drink.', 'Is that what you found your supposition on, Mrs. Crupp?', 'Sir, I s a young lady in both of ', 'It was but the gentleman which died here before yourself, that fell in love--with a barmaid--and had his waistcoats took in directly, though much swelled by drinking.', 'Mrs. Crupp, I must beg you not to connect the young lady in my case with a barmaid, or anything of that sort, if you please.', 'Mr. Copperfull, I  said Mrs. Crupp, ', 'Now, Has that there little bill of mine been heerd on?', 'Oh, master says he', 'Because, because that there little bill has been running so long, that I begin to believe it t be heerd of. Now, I', 'I tell you what, are you fond of milk?', 'Yes, I likes it, Good, Then you won ye hear? Not a fragment of milk you won', 'Does Mr. Traddles live here?', 'Is he at home?', 'Traddles, I am delighted to see you.', 'I am delighted to see you.', 'I am delighted to see YOU, Copperfield, I am very glad indeed to see you. It was because I was thoroughly glad to see you when we met in Ely Place, and was sure you were thoroughly glad to see me, that I gave you this address instead of my address at chambers. Oh! You have chambers?', 'Why, I have the fourth of a room and a passage, and the fourth of a clerk, Three others and myself unite to have a set of chambers--to look business-like--and we quarter the clerk too. Half-a-crown a week he costs me.', 'It  said Traddles,  t usually give my address here. It', 'You are reading for the bar, Mr. Waterbrook informed me?', 'Why, yes, I am reading for the bar. The fact is, I have just begun to keep my terms, after rather a long delay. It', 'Do you know what I can', 'No,', 'That sky-blue suit you used to wear.', 'Lord, to be sure! Tight in the arms and legs, you know? Dear me! Well! Those were happy times, weren', 'I think our schoolmaster might have made them happier, without doing any harm to any of us, I acknowledge,', 'Perhaps he might, But dear me, there was a good deal of fun going on. Do you remember the nights in the bedroom? When we used to have the suppers? And when you used to tell the stories? Ha, ha, ha! And do you remember when I got caned for crying about Mr. Mell? Old Creakle! I should like to see him again, too!', 'He was a brute to you, Traddles,', 'Do you think so? Really? Perhaps he was rather. But it', 'You were brought up by an uncle, then?', 'Of course I was! The one I was always going to write to. And always didn', 'Indeed!', 'Yes. He was a retired--what do you call it!--draper--cloth-merchant--and had made me his heir. But he didn', 'Do you really mean that?', 'Oh dear, yes, Copperfield! I mean it, It was an unfortunate thing, but he didn t at all what he expected, and so he married his housekeeper.', 'And what did you do?', 'I didn  said Traddles.  t provided for.', 'Did you get nothing, Traddles, after all?', 'Oh dear, yes! I got fifty pounds. I had never been brought up to any profession, and at first I was at a loss what to do for myself. However, I began, with the assistance of the son of a professional man, who had been to Salem House--Yawler, with his nose on one side. Do you recollect him?', 'It don  said Traddles.  t answer very well; and then I began to state cases for them, and make abstracts, and that sort of work. For I am a plodding kind of fellow, Copperfield, and had learnt the way of doing such things pithily. Well! That put it in my head to enter myself as a law student; and that ran away with all that was left of the fifty pounds. Yawler recommended me to one or two other offices, however--Mr. Waterbrook  (glancing at his table),   said Traddles, preserving the same air of cheerful confidence in all he said, ', 'So, by little and little, and not living high, I managed to scrape up the hundred pounds at last, and thank Heaven that  said Traddles, wincing again as if he had had another tooth out,  s so pleasant to see you, that I sha t conceal anything. Therefore you must know that I am engaged.', 'She is a curate  said Traddles;   For he saw me glance, involuntarily, at the prospect on the inkstand.  s the church! You come round here to the left, out of this gate, and exactly where I hold this pen, there stands the house--facing, you understand, towards the church.', 'She is such a dear girl! a little older than me, but the dearest girl! I told you I was going out of town? I have been down there. I walked there, and I walked back, and I had the most delightful time! I dare say ours is likely to be a rather long engagement, but our motto is "Wait and hope!" We always say that. "Wait and hope," we always say. And she would wait, Copperfield, till she was sixty--any age you can mention--for me!', 'However, it t made a beginning towards housekeeping. No, no; we have begun. We must get on by degrees, but we have begun. Here, are two pieces of furniture to commence with. This flower-pot and stand, she bought herself. You put that in a parlour window, with a plant in it, and--and there you are! This little round table with the marble top (it  said Traddles.  s an admirable piece of workmanship--firm as a rock!', 'with a plant in it, and--and there you are! This little round table with the marble top (it  said Traddles.  s an admirable piece of workmanship--firm as a rock!', 'It  said Traddles,  s something. The table-cloths, and pillow-cases, and articles of that kind, are what discourage me most, Copperfield. So does the ironmongery--candle-boxes, and gridirons, and that sort of necessaries--because those things tell, and mount up. However, "wait and hope!" And I assure you she', 'I am quite certain of it,', 'In the meantime, and this is the end of my prosing about myself, I get on as well as I can. I don t spend much. In general, I board with the people downstairs, who are very agreeable people indeed. Both Mr. and Mrs. Micawber have seen a good deal of life, and are excellent company.', 'My dear Traddles! What are you talking about?', 'Mr. and Mrs. Micawber! Why, I am intimately acquainted with them!', 'I beg your pardon, Mr. Traddles, I was not aware that there was any individual, alien to this tenement, in your sanctum.', 'How do you do, Mr. Micawber?', 'Sir, you are exceedingly obliging. I am in statu quo.', 'And Mrs. Micawber?', 'Sir, she is also, thank God, in statu quo.', 'And the children, Mr. Micawber?', 'Sir, I rejoice to reply that they are, likewise, in the enjoyment of salubrity.', 'Good Heaven, Mr. Traddles! to think that I should find you acquainted with the friend of my youth, the companion of earlier days! My dear! Here is a gentleman in Mr. Traddles', 'And how is our good friend the Doctor, Copperfield? and all the circle at Canterbury?', 'and all the circle at Canterbury?', 'I have none but good accounts of them,', 'I am most delighted to hear it, It was at Canterbury where we last met. Within the shadow, I may figuratively say, of that religious edifice immortalized by Chaucer, which was anciently the resort of Pilgrims from the remotest corners of--in short, in the immediate neighbourhood of the Cathedral.', 'You find us, Copperfield, at present established, on what may be designated as a small and unassuming scale; but, you are aware that I have, in the course of my career, surmounted difficulties, and conquered obstacles. You are no stranger to the fact, that there have been periods of my life, when it has been requisite that I should pause, until certain expected events should turn up; when it has been necessary that I should fall back, before making what I trust I shall not be accused of presumption in terming--a spring. The present is one of those momentous stages in the life of man. You find me, fallen back, FOR a spring; and I have every reason to believe that a vigorous leap will shortly be the result.', 'at present established, on what may be designated as a small and unassuming scale; but, you are aware that I have, in the course of my career, surmounted difficulties, and conquered obstacles. You are no stranger to the fact, that there have been periods of my life, when it has been requisite that I should pause, until certain expected events should turn up; when it has been necessary that I should fall back, before making what I trust I shall not be accused of presumption in terming--a spring. The present is one of those momentous stages in the life of man. You find me, fallen back, FOR a spring; and I have every reason to believe that a vigorous leap will shortly be the result.', 'My dear, here is a gentleman of the name of Copperfield, who wishes to renew his acquaintance with you.', 'My dear Copperfield, I need hardly tell you that to have beneath our roof, under existing circumstances, a mind like that which gleams--if I may be allowed the expression--which gleams--in your friend Traddles, is an unspeakable comfort. With a washerwoman, who exposes hard-bake for sale in her parlour-window, dwelling next door, and a Bow-street officer residing over the way, you may imagine that his society is a source of consolation to myself and to Mrs. Micawber. I am at present, my dear Copperfield, engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description--in other words, it does not pay--and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been the consequence. I am, however, delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something turning up (I am not at liberty to say in what direction), which I trust will enable me to provide, permanently, both for myself and for your friend Traddles, in whom I have an unaffected interest. You may, perhaps, be prepared to hear that Mrs. Micawber is in a state of health which renders it not wholly improbable that an addition may be ultimately made to those pledges of affection which--in short, to the infantine group. Mrs. Micawber', 'My dear Copperfield, this is luxurious. This is a way of life which reminds me of the period when I was myself in a state of celibacy, and Mrs. Micawber had not yet been solicited to plight her faith at the Hymeneal altar.', 'He means, solicited by him, Mr. Copperfield, He cannot answer for others.', 'My dear, I have no desire to answer for others. I am too well aware that when, in the inscrutable decrees of Fate, you were reserved for me, it is possible you may have been reserved for one, destined, after a protracted struggle, at length to fall a victim to pecuniary involvements of a complicated nature. I understand your allusion, my love. I regret it, but I can bear it.', 'Micawber! Have I deserved this! I, who never have deserted you; who never WILL desert you, Micawber! My love, you will forgive, and our old and tried friend Copperfield will, I am sure, forgive, the momentary laceration of a wounded spirit, made sensitive by a recent collision with the Minion of Power--in other words, with a ribald Turncock attached to the water-works--and will pity, not condemn, its excesses.', 'My dear friend Copperfield, accidents will occur in the best-regulated families; and in families not regulated by that pervading influence which sanctifies while it enhances the--a--I would say, in short, by the influence of Woman, in the lofty character of Wife, they may be expected with confidence, and must be borne with philosophy. If you will allow me to take the liberty of remarking that there are few comestibles better, in their way, than a Devil, and that I believe, with a little division of labour, we could accomplish a good one if the young person in attendance could produce a gridiron, I would put it to you, that this little misfortune may be easily repaired.', 'What', 'I beg your pardon, sir, I was directed to come in. Is my master not here, sir?', 'No.', 'Have you not seen him, sir?', 'No; don', 'Not immediately so, sir.', 'Did he tell you you would find him here?', 'Not exactly so, sir. But I should think he might be here tomorrow, as he has not been here today. Is he coming up from Oxford?', 'I beg, sir, that you will be seated, and allow me to do this.', 'Can I do anything more, sir?', 'None, I am obliged to you, sir.', 'Is Mr. Steerforth coming from Oxford?', 'I beg your pardon, sir?', 'Is Mr. Steerforth coming from Oxford?', 'I should imagine that he might be here tomorrow, sir. I rather thought he might have been here today, sir. The mistake is mine, no doubt, sir.', 'If you should see him first--', 'If you t think I shall see him first.', 'In case you do, pray say that I am sorry he was not here today, as an old schoolfellow of his was here.', 'Indeed, sir!', 'Oh! Littimer!', 'Sir!', 'Did you remain long at Yarmouth, that time?', 'Not particularly so, sir.', 'You saw the boat completed?', 'Yes, sir. I remained behind on purpose to see the boat completed.', 'I know!', 'Mr. Steerforth has not seen it yet, I suppose?', 'I really can t say, sir. I wish you good night, sir.', 'But punch, my dear Copperfield, like time and tide, waits for no man. Ah! it is at the present moment in high flavour. My love, will you give me your opinion?', 'Then I will drink,', 'Ahem! My dear, another glass?', 'As we are quite confidential here, Mr. Copperfield, Mr. Traddles being a part of our domesticity, I should much like to have your opinion on Mr. Micawber  said Mrs. Micawber argumentatively, ', 'Then, s wisdom, when he might otherwise go a little crooked, ', 'The articles of corn and coals, being equally out of the question, Mr. Copperfield, I naturally look round the world, and say, "What is there in which a person of Mr. Micawber s peculiar temperament is, I am convinced, a certainty.', 'I will not conceal from you, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that I have long felt the Brewing business to be particularly adapted to Mr. Micawber. Look at Barclay and Perkins! Look at Truman, Hanbury, and Buxton! It is on that extensive footing that Mr. Micawber, I know from my own knowledge of him, is calculated to shine; and the profits, I am told, are e-NOR-MOUS! But if Mr. Micawber cannot get into those firms--which decline to answer his letters, when he offers his services even in an inferior capacity--what is the use of dwelling upon that idea? None. I may have a conviction that Mr. Micawber', 'Hem! Really, my dear,', 'My love, be silent, I may have a conviction, Mr. Copperfield, that Mr. Micawber s abilities, or receive the offer of them with contumely, what is the use of dwelling upon THAT idea? None. As to originating a banking-business, I may know that there are members of my family who, if they chose to place their money in Mr. Micawber s hands--which they don', 'What do I deduce from this? What is the conclusion, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to which I am irresistibly brought? Am I wrong in saying, it is clear that we must live?', 'Just so, It is precisely that. And the fact is, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that we can not live without something widely different from existing circumstances shortly turning up. Now I am convinced, myself, and this I have pointed out to Mr. Micawber several times of late, that things cannot be expected to turn up of themselves. We must, in a measure, assist to turn them up. I may be wrong, but I have formed that opinion.', 'Very well, Then what do I recommend? Here is Mr. Micawber with a variety of qualifications--with great talent--', 'Really, my love,', 'Pray, my dear, allow me to conclude. Here is Mr. Micawber, with a variety of qualifications, with great talent--I should say, with genius, but that may be the partiality of a wife--', 'And here is Mr. Micawber without any suitable position or employment. Where does that responsibility rest? Clearly on society. Then I would make a fact so disgraceful known, and boldly challenge society to set it right. It appears to me, my dear Mr. Copperfield, that what Mr. Micawber has to do, is to throw down the gauntlet to society, and say, in effect, "Show me who will take that up. Let the party immediately step forward."', 'By advertising, in all the papers. It appears to me, that what Mr. Micawber has to do, in justice to himself, in justice to his family, and I will even go so far as to say in justice to society, by which he has been hitherto overlooked, is to advertise in all the papers; to describe himself plainly as so-and-so, with such and such qualifications and to put it thus: "Now employ me, on remunerative terms, and address, post-paid, to W. M., Post Office, Camden Town."', 'This idea of Mrs. Micawber  said Mr. Micawber, making his shirt-collar meet in front of his chin, and glancing at me sideways, ', 'Advertising is rather expensive,', 'Exactly so! Quite true, my dear Mr. Copperfield! I have made the identical observation to Mr. Micawber. It is for that reason especially, that I think Mr. Micawber ought (as I have already said, in justice to himself, in justice to his family, and in justice to society) to raise a certain sum of money--on a bill.', 'Quite true, my dear Mr. Copperfield! I have made the identical observation to Mr. Micawber. It is for that reason especially, that I think Mr. Micawber ought (as I have already said, in justice to himself, in justice to his family, and in justice to society) to raise a certain sum of money--on a bill.', 'If no member of my family, is possessed of sufficient natural feeling to negotiate that bill--I believe there is a better business-term to express what I mean--', 'Discount.', 'To discount that bill, then my opinion is, that Mr. Micawber should go into the City, should take that bill into the Money Market, and should dispose of it for what he can get. If the individuals in the Money Market oblige Mr. Micawber to sustain a great sacrifice, that is between themselves and their consciences. I view it, steadily, as an investment. I recommend Mr. Micawber, my dear Mr. Copperfield, to do the same; to regard it as an investment which is sure of return, and to make up his mind to any sacrifice.', 'I will not, I will not protract these remarks on the subject of Mr. Micawber s form is fragile, but her grasp of a subject is inferior to none." That my papa was too partial, I well know; but that he was an observer of character in some degree, my duty and my reason equally forbid me to doubt.', 'I will not protract these remarks on the subject of Mr. Micawber s form is fragile, but her grasp of a subject is inferior to none." That my papa was too partial, I well know; but that he was an observer of character in some degree, my duty and my reason equally forbid me to doubt.', 'I am very much obliged to you indeed. And I do assure you, she', 'Traddles, Mr. Micawber don t lend him anything.', 'My dear Copperfield, I haven', 'You have got a name, you know,', 'Oh! You call THAT something to lend?', 'Certainly.', 'Oh! Yes, to be sure! I am very much obliged to you, Copperfield; but--I am afraid I have lent him that already.', 'For the bill that is to be a certain investment?', 'No, Not for that one. This is the first I have heard of that one. I have been thinking that he will most likely propose that one, on the way home. Mine', 'I hope there will be nothing wrong about it, I hope not, I should think not, though, because he told me, only the other day, that it was provided for. That was Mr. Micawber', 'Why, Daisy, old boy, dumb-foundered! Have I detected you in another feast, you Sybarite! These Doctors', 'I was so surprised at first, that I had hardly breath to greet you with, Steerforth.', 'Well, the sight of me is good for sore eyes, as the Scotch say, and so is the sight of you, Daisy, in full bloom. How are you, my Bacchanal?', 'I am very well, and not at all Bacchanalian tonight, though I confess to another party of three.', 'All of whom I met in the street, talking loud in your praise, Who', 'Heaven knows, Not a bore, I hope? I thought he looked a little like one.', 'Traddles!', 'Who', 'Don', 'Oh! That fellow! Is he as soft as ever? And where the deuce did you pick him up?', 'Why, Daisy, here  he exclaimed, starting out of his silence with a burst, and taking his seat at the table. ', 'I thought you came from Oxford?', 'Not I, I have been seafaring--better employed.', 'Littimer was here today, to inquire for you, and I understood him that you were at Oxford; though, now I think of it, he certainly did not say so.', 'Littimer is a greater fool than I thought him, to have been inquiring for me at all, As to understanding him, you are a cleverer fellow than most of us, Daisy, if you can do that.', 'That  said I, moving my chair to the table.   interested to know all about it. ', 'Have you been there long?', 'No, An escapade of a week or so.', 'And how are they all? Of course, little Emily is not married yet?', 'Not yet. Going to be, I believe--in so many weeks, or months, or something or other. I have not seen much of  ; he laid down his knife and fork, which he had been using with great diligence, and began feeling in his pockets; ', 'From whom?', 'Why, from your old nurse, J. Steerforth, Esquire, debtor, to The Willing Mind"; that ll find it presently. Old what s in a bad way, and it', 'Barkis, do you mean?', 'Yes! it ll find the letter. Is it there?', 'it ll find the letter. Is it there?', 'Here it is!', 'That', 'a little nearer my duty to my ever darling', 'It  he said, when I had done;  t be scared by the common lot. If we failed to hold our own, because that equal foot at all men', 'And win what race?', 'The race that one has started in, Ride on!', 'I tell you what, Steerforth, if your high spirits will listen to me--', 'They are potent spirits, and will do whatever you like,', 'Then I tell you what, Steerforth. I think I will go down and see my old nurse. It is not that I can do her any good, or render her any real service; but she is so attached to me that my visit will have as much effect on her, as if I could do both. She will take it so kindly that it will be a comfort and support to her. It is no great effort to make, I am sure, for such a friend as she has been to me. Wouldn s journey, if you were in my place?', 'You have just come back, and it would be in vain to ask you to go with me?', 'Quite, I am for Highgate tonight. I have not seen my mother this long time, and it lies upon my conscience, for it  he said, holding me out at arm', 'Yes, I think so.', 'Well, then, don', 'You are a nice fellow to talk of flying off, Steerforth, who are always running wild on some unknown expedition or other!', 'Come! Say the next day, and pass as much of tomorrow as you can with us! Who knows when we may meet again, else? Come! Say the next day! I want you to stand between Rosa Dartle and me, and keep us asunder.', 'Would you love each other too much, without me?', 'Yes; or hate, no matter which. Come! Say the next day!', 'You have been a long time, without coming here. Is your profession really so engaging and interesting as to absorb your whole attention? I ask because I always want to be informed, when I am ignorant. Is it really, though?', 'Oh! I am glad to know that, because I always like to be put right when I am wrong, You mean it is a little dry, perhaps?', 'Well, perhaps it was a little dry.', 'Oh! and that  said she.  t it a little--Eh?--for him; I don', 'Don t say that it does, mind I want to know--don t it make him, perhaps, a little more remiss than usual in his visits to his blindly-doting--eh?', 'Miss Dartle, pray do not think--', 'I don  she said.  t suppose that I think anything! I am not suspicious. I only ask a question. I don s not so? Well! I am very glad to know it.', 'It certainly is not the fact, that I am accountable for Steerforth t know at this moment, unless I understand it from you. I have not seen him this long while, until last night.', 'No?', 'Indeed, Miss Dartle, no!', 'What is he doing?', 'What is he doing? In what is that man assisting him, who never looks at me without an inscrutable falsehood in his eyes? If you are honourable and faithful, I don', 'Miss Dartle, how shall I tell you, so that you will believe me, that I know of nothing in Steerforth different from what there was when I first came here? I can think of nothing. I firmly believe there is nothing. I hardly understand even what you mean.', 'Oh, but do tell me, though, somebody, because I have been thinking about it all day, and I want to know.', 'You want to know what, Rosa? Pray, pray, Rosa, do not be mysterious.', 'Mysterious! Oh! really? Do you consider me so?', 'Do I constantly entreat you, to speak plainly, in your own natural manner?', 'Oh! then this is not my natural manner? Now you must really bear with me, because I ask for information. We never know ourselves.', 'It has become a second nature, but I remember,--and so must you, I think,--when your manner was different, Rosa; when it was not so guarded, and was more trustful.', 'I am sure you are right, and so it is that bad habits grow upon one! Really? Less guarded and more trustful? How can I, imperceptibly, have changed, I wonder! Well, that', 'I wish you would,', 'Oh! I really will, you know! I will learn frankness from--let me see--from James.', 'You cannot learn frankness, Rosa, in a better school.', 'That I am sure of, If I am sure of anything, of course, you know, I am sure of that.', 'Well, my dear Rosa, we have not heard what it is that you want to be satisfied about?', 'That I want to be satisfied about? Oh! It was only whether people, who are like each other in their moral constitution--is that the phrase?', 'It', 'Thank you:--whether people, who are like each other in their moral constitution, are in greater danger than people not so circumstanced, supposing any serious cause of variance to arise between them, of being divided angrily and deeply?', 'I should say yes,', 'Should you? Dear me! Supposing then, for instance--any unlikely thing will do for a supposition--that you and your mother were to have a serious quarrel.', 'My dear Rosa, suggest some other supposition! James and I know our duty to each other better, I pray Heaven!', 'suggest some other supposition! James and I know our duty to each other better, I pray Heaven!', 'Oh! To be sure. That would prevent it? Why, of course it would. Exactly. Now, I am glad I have been so foolish as to put the case, for it is so very good to know that your duty to each other would prevent it! Thank you very much.', 'Don  said Steerforth (which she had already done) t! Be kind for once, and sing us an Irish song.', 'What do you care for an Irish song?', 'Much! Much more than for any other. Here is Daisy, too, loves music from his soul. Sing us an Irish song, Rosa! and let me sit and listen as I used to do.', 'What is the matter with Rosa?', 'She has been an angel, mother, for a little while; and has run into the opposite extreme, since, by way of compensation.', 'You should be careful not to irritate her, James. Her temper has been soured, remember, and ought not to be tried.', 'Oh, Heaven knows, Anything you like--or nothing! I told you she took everything, herself included, to a grindstone, and sharpened it. She is an edge-tool, and requires great care in dealing with. She is always dangerous. Good night!', 'Good night! my dear Steerforth! I shall be gone before you wake in the morning. Good night!', 'Daisy, for though that s the name I like best to call you by--and I wish, I wish, I wish, you could give it to me!', 'Why so I can, if I choose,', 'Daisy, if anything should ever separate us, you must think of me at my best, old boy. Come! Let us make that bargain. Think of me at my best, if circumstances should ever part us!', 'You have no best to me, Steerforth, and no worst. You are always equally loved, and cherished in my heart.', 'Why, bless my life and soul! how do you find yourself? Take a seat.---Smoke not disagreeable, I hope?', 'By no means, I like it--in somebody else', 'What, not in your own, eh? All the better, sir. Bad habit for a young man. Take a seat. I smoke, myself, for the asthma.', 'I am sorry to have heard bad news of Mr. Barkis,', 'Do you know how he is tonight?', 'The very question I should have put to you, sir, but on account of delicacy. It s ill, we can', 'but on account of delicacy. It s ill, we can', 'Yes, yes, you understand, We dursn t recover, to say "Omer and Joram', 'It  said Mr. Omer.  t go and say, "how is he?"', 'I  said Mr. Omer.  t likely that, to my own knowledge, I t likely, in a man who knows his wind will go, when it DOES go, as if a pair of bellows was cut open; and that man a grandfather,', 'Look at me! My wind may fail me at any moment, and it ain d be self-interested under such circumstances. I say it ain', 'It ain  said Mr. Omer.  t that. Some good and some bad goes, no doubt, to all callings. What I wish is, that parties was brought up stronger-minded.', 'Accordingly we ly. She knows what our real objects are, and she don s there, after hours, helping her aunt a bit), to ask her how he is tonight; and if you was to please to wait till they come back, they lers. Will you take something? A glass of srub and water, now? I smoke on srub and water, myself, because it  said Mr. Omer, huskily,  t the passages that ll find passages, my dear."', 'Well, sir, I tell you truly, I shall be glad when her marriage has taken place.', 'Why so?', 'Well, she  said Mr. Omer.  t that she s prettier--I do assure you, she is prettier. It ain t work as well as ever, for she does. She WAS worth any six, and she IS worth any six. But somehow she wants heart. If you understand, what I mean in a general way by the expression, "A long pull, and a strong pull, and a pull altogether, my hearties, hurrah!" I should say to you, that that was--in a general way--what I miss in Em', 'ly.', 'I am sure she has!', 'To see the clinging of that pretty little thing to her uncle, to see the way she holds on to him, tighter and tighter, and closer and closer, every day, is to see a sight. Now, you know, there s the case. Why should it be made a longer one than is needful?', 'Therefore, I mentioned to them, this. I said, "Now, don ly nailed down in point of time, at all. Make it your own time. Her services have been more valuable than was supposed; her learning has been quicker than was supposed; Omer and Joram can run their pen through what remains; and she t, very well still. We t you see, it ain', 'Not at all, I am certain,', 'Not at all! You  said Mr. Omer.  s a cousin she', 'Oh yes, I know him well.', 'Of course you do, Well, sir! Her cousin being, as it appears, in good work, and well to do, thanked me in a very manly sort of manner for this (conducting himself altogether, I must say, in a way that gives me a high opinion of him), and went and took as comfortable a little house as you or I could wish to clap eyes on. That little house is now furnished right through, as neat and complete as a doll s illness having taken this bad turn, poor fellow, they would have been man and wife--I dare say, by this time. As it is, there', 'And Emily, Mr. Omer? Has she become more settled?', 'Why that, you know, can s death needn s an uncertain state of matters, you see.', 'I see,', 'Consequently, Em s still a little down, and a little fluttered; perhaps, upon the whole, she s little girl, you  said Mr. Omer, pondering, ', 'how she loves that child!', 'Ah! No good. A sad story, sir, however you come to know it. I never thought there was harm in the girl. I wouldn d take me up directly--but I never did. None of us ever did.', 'No good. A sad story, sir, however you come to know it. I never thought there was harm in the girl. I wouldn d take me up directly--but I never did. None of us ever did.', 'This is very kind of you, Mas', 'It', 'Em  cried Mr. Peggotty.  s Mas r Davy?', 'It  said Mr. Peggotty, smoothing her rich hair with his great hard hand,  t abear the sorrer of this. It ral in young folk, Mas re new to these here trials, and timid, like my little bird,--it ral.', 'It  said Mr. Peggotty,  s Ham come fur to take you home. Theer! Go along with t  Em', 'Let you stay with your uncle? Why, you doen ll be so soon, is here fur to take you home? Now a person wouldn  said Mr. Peggotty, looking round at both of us, with infinite pride;  t more salt in it than she has fondness in her for her uncle--a foolish little Em', 'Em s in the right in that, Mas  said Ham.  ly wishes of it, and as she ll leave her till morning. Let me stay too!', 'No, no, You doen s as good--to take and hull away a day t ought to watch and work both. That won t afeerd of Em', 'Now, I r Davy ll cheer her up a bit, Sit ye down by the fire, the while, my dear, and warm those mortal cold hands. You doen ll go along with me?--Well! come along with me--come! If her uncle was turned out of house and home, and forced to lay down in a dyke, Mas  said Mr. Peggotty, with no less pride than before,  s my belief she ll be someone else, soon,--someone else, soon, Em', 'Barkis, my dear! s foot.  s my dear boy--my dear boy, Master Davy, who brought us together, Barkis! That you sent messages by, you know! Won', 'He', 'People can  said Mr. Peggotty,  s pretty nigh out. They can s pretty nigh in--not properly born, till flood. He s ebb at half-arter three, slack water half an hour. If he lives till it turns, he', 'He', 'They are both a-going out fast.', 'Barkis, my dear!', 'C. P. Barkis, No better woman anywhere!', 'Look! Here', 'Barkis is willin', 'You r Davy! Doen s wet.', 'Thank you, Mr. Peggotty, It', 'It', 'So   said Mr. Peggotty, feeling my shoulders.  t o re welcome, kind and hearty.', 'Thank you, Mr. Peggotty, I am sure of that. Well, Peggotty! And how are you, old woman?', 'Ha, ha! there d it; and the departed done what was right by her, as she done what was right by the departed;--and--and--and it', 'Cheer up, my pritty mawther! Doen y a little bit, and see if a good deal more doen ral!', 'Not to me, Dan  returned Mrs. Gummidge.  s nat', 'No, no,', 'Yes, yes, Dan  said Mrs. Gummidge.  t a person to live with them as has had money left. Things go too contrary with me. I had better be a riddance.', 'Why, how should I ever spend it without you? What are you a talking on? Doen', 'I know  cried Mrs. Gummidge, with a pitiable whimper,  m told so! How could I expect to be wanted, being so lone and lorn, and so contrary!', 'Theer! Theer we are, Missis Gummidge! Lighted up, accordin re a wonderin s fur, sir! Well, it ly. You see, the path ain m here at the hour as she  home, I puts the light in the winder. That, you see, meets two objects. She says, says Em s home!" she says. And likewise, says Em s theer!" Fur if I ain', 'meets two objects. She says, says Em s home!" she says. And likewise, says Em s theer!" Fur if I ain', 'You', 'Well, I doen', 'Not azackly,', 'No, not to look at, but to--to consider on, you know. I doen ly m--I  said Mr. Peggotty, with sudden emphasis-- t say more--if I doen most. I takes  em down, and I touches of  ly. So  t see one on  s a babby fur you, in the form of a great Sea Porkypine!', 'em rough used a purpose--not fur the whole wureld. There', 'It  said Mr. Peggotty, with a delighted face, after some further rubbing of his legs,   played with her so much, and made believe as we was Turks, and French, and sharks, and every wariety of forinners--bless you, yes; and lions and whales, and I doen t no higher than my knee. I  said Mr. Peggotty, gleefully holding out his hand towards it,  s married and gone, I shall put that candle theer, just the same as now. I know wery well that when I  nights (and where else should I live, bless your arts, whatever fortun t here or I ain m expecting of her, like I S a babby for you, in the form of a Sea Porkypine! Why, at the present minute, when I see the candle sparkle up, I says to myself, "She ly S a babby for you, in the form of a Sea Porkypine! Right for all that, fur here she is!', 'I know wery well that arter she m here o  I come into!) and she ain t theer, I shall put the candle in the winder, and sit afore the fire, pretending I m a doing now. THERE  said Mr. Peggotty, with another roar,  s a looking at it! Em s a coming!" THERE  said Mr. Peggotty, stopping in his roar, and smiting his hands together; ', 'Wheer ly?', 'Mas ly and me has got to show you?', 'Ham! what', 'Mas', 'Ham! Poor good fellow! For Heaven s the matter!', 'My love, Mas d have died for, and would die for now--she', 'Gone!', 'Em s run away! Oh, Mas s run away, when I pray my good and gracious God to kill her (her that is so dear above all things) sooner than let her come to ruin and disgrace!', 'You  he said, hurriedly,  s right and best. What am I to say, indoors? How am I ever to break it to him, Mas', 'Read it, sir, Slow, please. I doen', '"When you, who love me so much better than I ever have deserved, even when my mind was innocent, see this, I shall be far away."', 'I shall be fur away, Stop! Em', '"When I leave my dear home--my dear home--oh, my dear home!--in the morning,"', '"--it will be never to come back, unless he brings me back a lady. This will be found at night, many hours after, instead of me. Oh, if you knew how my heart is torn. If even you, that I have wronged so much, that never can forgive me, could only know what I suffer! I am too wicked to write about myself! Oh, take comfort in thinking that I am so bad. Oh, for mercy t remember how affectionate and kind you have all been to me--don ll pray for all, often, on my knees. If he don t pray for my own self, I', 'Who', 'There  said Mr. Peggotty. ', 'Mas  implored Ham.  t ought to hear it, sir.', 'I want to know his name!', 'For some time past, there s been a gen n too. Both of ', 'The servant, was seen along with--our poor girl--last night. He t stay, Mas t!', 'A strange chay and hosses was outside town, this morning, on the Norwich road, a  Ham went on.  ly was nigh him. The t s the man.', 'For the Lord  said Mr. Peggotty, falling back, and putting out his hand, as if to keep off what he dreaded.  t tell me his name', 'Mas  exclaimed Ham, in a broken voice,  t no fault of yourn--and I am far from laying of it to you--but his name is Steerforth, and he', 'Bear a hand with this! I t do it, Bear a hand and help me. Well! Now give me that theer hat!', 'Now give me that theer hat!', 'I m a going to seek my Em m a going, first, to stave in that theer boat, and sink it where I would have drownded him, as I  he said, wildly, holding out his clenched right hand,  d have drownded him, and thought it right!--I', 'Where?', 'Anywhere! I m a going to find my poor niece in her shame, and bring her back. No one stop me! I tell you I', 'No, no! No, no, Dan l, and that l--what have my contraries ever been to this!--and let us speak a word about them times when she was first an orphan, and when Ham was too, and when I was a poor widder woman, and you took me in. It l, and you l, "As you have done it unto one of the least of these, you have done it unto me",--and that can never fail under this roof, that', 'No, no, Dan l, and that l--what have my contraries ever been to this!--and let us speak a word about them times when she was first an orphan, and when Ham was too, and when I was a poor widder woman, and you took me in. It l, and you l, "As you have done it unto one of the least of these, you have done it unto me",--and that can never fail under this roof, that', 'We have had a mort of talk, sir, of what we ought and doen', 'My dooty here, sir, is done. I  he stopped, and went on in a firmer voice:  m a going to seek her. That', 'I  he rejoined,  re agreeable, tomorrow.', 'Ham, he', 'Will you desert the old boat, Mr. Peggotty?', 'My station, Mas  he returned,  t there no longer; and if ever a boat foundered, since there was darkness on the face of the deep, that one t mean as it should be deserted. Fur from that.', 'My wishes is, sir, as it shall look, day and night, winter and summer, as it has always looked, since she fust know t have the old place seem to cast her off, you understand, but seem to tempt her to draw nigher to  r Davy, seein', 'Every night, as reg s a knock, Ham (partic s door, doen', 'On what r Davy; and over yon. On the life before you, do you mean?', 'Ay, Mas t rightly know how ', 'What end?', 'I doen he said, thoughtfully;  s gone! Mas  he added; answering, as I think, my look;  t no call to be afeerd of me: but I t fare to feel no matters,', 'Dan  said she,  ll do nowt. Try, that  she meant her chattering,  l, and I won', 'All times and seasons, you know, Dan  said Mrs. Gummidge,   to your wishes. I re away, and send my letters to Mas ll write to me too, Dan', 'You m afeerd!', 'No, no, Dan  she returned,  t be that. Doen  (Mrs. Gummidge meant a home),  l. In the fine time, I shall set outside the door as I used to do. If any should come nigh, they shall see the old widder woman true to ', 'A deceitful, bad-hearted girl, There was no good in her, ever!', 'Don  I returned.  t think so.', 'Yes, I do!', 'No, no,', 'What will she ever do! Where will she go! What will become of her! Oh, how could she be so cruel, to herself and him!', 'My little Minnie, has only just now been got to sleep. Even in her sleep she is sobbing for Em ly was wicked? What can I say to her, when Em s the last night she was here, and laid her head down on the pillow beside her till she was fast asleep! The ribbon s neck now. It ought not to be, perhaps, but what can I do? Em', 'Miss Mowcher! how do you come here? What is the matter?', 'Pray tell me, Miss Mowcher, what is the matter! are you ill?', 'My dear young soul, I am ill here, I am very ill. To think that it should come to this, when I might have known it and perhaps prevented it, if I hadn', 'I am surprised, to see you so distressed and serious', 'Yes, it  she said.  s the way. The old way!', 'It may be, with others, but I do assure you it is not with me. Perhaps I ought not to be at all surprised to see you as you are now: I know so little of you. I said, without consideration, what I thought.', 'What can I do? See! What I am, my father was; and my sister is; and my brother is. I have worked for sister and brother these many years--hard, Mr. Copperfield--all day. I must live. I do no harm. If there are people so unreflecting or so cruel, as to make a jest of me, what is left for me to do but to make a jest of myself, them, and everything? If I do so, for the time, whose fault is that? Mine?', 'If I had shown myself a sensitive dwarf to your false friend, how much of his help or good will do you think I should ever have had? If little Mowcher (who had no hand, young gentleman, in the making of herself) addressed herself to him, or the like of him, because of her misfortunes, when do you suppose her small voice would have been heard? Little Mowcher would have as much need to live, if she was the bitterest and dullest of pigmies; but she couldn', 'how much of his help or good will do you think I should ever have had? If little Mowcher (who had no hand, young gentleman, in the making of herself) addressed herself to him, or the like of him, because of her misfortunes, when do you suppose her small voice would have been heard? Little Mowcher would have as much need to live, if she was the bitterest and dullest of pigmies; but she couldn', 'Be thankful for me, if you have a kind heart, as I think you have, that while I know well what I am, I can be cheerful and endure it all. I am thankful for myself, at any rate, that I can find my tiny way through the world, without being beholden to anyone; and that in return for all that is thrown at me, in folly or vanity, as I go along, I can throw bubbles back. If I don', 'I saw you in the street just now. You may suppose I am not able to walk as fast as you, with my short legs and short breath, and I couldn t at home.', 'Do you know her?', 'I know of her, and about her, from Omer and Joram. I was there at seven o', 'May the Father of all Evil confound him, and ten times more confound that wicked servant; but I believed it was YOU who had a boyish passion for her!', 'I?', 'Child, child! In the name of blind ill-fortune, why did you praise her so, and blush, and look disturbed?', 'What did I know? He was crossing you and wheedling you, I saw; and you were soft wax in his hands, I saw. Had I left the room a minute, when his man told me that "Young Innocence" (so he called you, and you may call him "Old Guilt" all the days of your life) had set his heart upon her, and she was giddy and liked him, but his master was resolved that no harm should come of it--more for your sake than for hers--and that that was their business here? How could I BUT believe him? I saw Steerforth soothe and please you by his praise of her! You were the first to mention her name. You owned to an old admiration of her. You were hot and cold, and red and white, all at once when I spoke to you of her. What could I think--what DID I think--but that you were a young libertine in everything but experience, and had fallen into hands that had experience enough, and could manage you (having the fancy) for your own good? Oh! oh! oh! They were afraid of my finding out the truth, because I am a sharp little thing--I need be, to get through the world at all!--and they deceived me altogether, and I gave the poor unfortunate girl a letter, which I fully believe was the beginning of her ever speaking to Littimer, who was left behind on purpose!', 'My country rounds, brought me to Norwich, Mr. Copperfield, the night before last. What I happened to find there, about their secret way of coming and going, without you--which was strange--led to my suspecting something wrong. I got into the coach from London last night, as it came through Norwich, and was here this morning. Oh, oh, oh! too late!', 'I must go, It t mistrust me?', 'Come! you know you wouldn', 'You are a young man, Take a word of advice, even from three foot nothing. Try not to associate bodily defects with mental, my good friend, except for a solid reason.', 'Now, mind! I have some reason to suspect, from what I have heard--my ears are always open; I can', 'Trust me no more, but trust me no less, than you would trust a full-sized woman, If ever you see me again, unlike what I am now, and like what I was when you first saw me, observe what company I am in. Call to mind that I am a very helpless and defenceless little thing. Think of me at home with my brother like myself and sister like myself, when my day t, then, be very hard upon me, or surprised if I can be distressed and serious. Good night!', 'Mas  Ham whispered, drawing me aside, while Mr. Peggotty was stowing his bag among the luggage,  t know wheer he t know--what s bound upon a voyage that t, unless he finds what he ll be a friend to him, Mas', 'Trust me, I will indeed,', 'Thankee. Thankee, very kind, sir. One thing furder. I r Davy, and I han s of no use to me no more, except to live. If you can lay it out for him, I shall do my work with a better art. Though as to that, sir, you', 'No, sir, all that s empty. But you s at all times some laying by for him?', 'I know, with deep regret, what has brought you here. What do you want of me? What do you ask me to do?', '"Unless he brings me back a lady," I come to know, ma', 'No,', 'Why not?', 'It is impossible. He would disgrace himself. You cannot fail to know that she is far below him.', 'Raise her up!', 'She is uneducated and ignorant.', 'Maybe she  said Mr. Peggotty.  am; but I', 'Since you oblige me to speak more plainly, which I am very unwilling to do, her humble connexions would render such a thing impossible, if nothing else did.', 'Hark to this, ma  he returned, slowly and quietly.  t love her more. You doen s growed up among, not one of us that ll be content to let her be; we ll be content to trust her to her husband,--to her little children, p', 'I justify nothing. I make no counter-accusations. But I am sorry to repeat, it is impossible. Such a marriage would irretrievably blight my son', 'I am looking at the likeness of the face, that has looked at me, in my home, at my fireside, in my boat--wheer not?---smiling and friendly, when it was so treacherous, that I go half wild when I think of it. If the likeness of that face don s blight and ruin, it t know, being a lady s worse.', 'What compensation can you make to ME for opening such a pit between me and my son? What is your love to mine? What is your separation to ours?', 'No, Rosa, not a word! Let the man listen to what I say! My son, who has been the object of my life, to whom its every thought has been devoted, whom I have gratified from a child in every wish, from whom I have had no separate existence since his birth,--to take up in a moment with a miserable girl, and avoid me! To repay my confidence with systematic deception, for her sake, and quit me for her! To set this wretched fancy, against his mother', 'I say, Rosa, not a word! If he can stake his all upon the lightest object, I can stake my all upon a greater purpose. Let him go where he will, with the means that my love has secured to him! Does he think to reduce me by long absence? He knows his mother very little if he does. Let him put away his whim now, and he is welcome back. Let him not put her away now, and he never shall come near me, living or dying, while I can raise my hand to make a sign against it, unless, being rid of her for ever, he comes humbly to me and begs for my forgiveness. This is my right. This is the acknowledgement I WILL HAVE. This is the separation that there is between us! And is this, no injury?', 'Doen am, I come heer with no hope, and I take away no hope. I have done what I thowt should be done, but I never looked fur any good to come of my stan', 'You do well, indeed, to bring this fellow here!', 'This is a fellow, to champion and bring here, is he not? You are a true man!', 'Miss Dartle, you are surely not so unjust as to condemn ME!', 'Why do you bring division between these two mad creatures? Don', 'Is it my doing?', 'Is it your doing! Why do you bring this man here?', 'He is a deeply-injured man, Miss Dartle, You may not know it.', 'I know that James Steerforth, has a false, corrupt heart, and is a traitor. But what need I know or care about this fellow, and his common niece?', 'Miss Dartle, you deepen the injury. It is sufficient already. I will only say, at parting, that you do him a great wrong.', 'I do him no wrong, They are a depraved, worthless set. I would have her whipped!', 'Oh, shame, Miss Dartle! shame! How can you bear to trample on his undeserved affliction!', 'I would trample on them all, I would have his house pulled down. I would have her branded on the face, dressed in rags, and cast out in the streets to starve. If I had the power to sit in judgement on her, I would see it done. See it done? I would do it! I detest her. If I ever could reproach her with her infamous condition, I would go anywhere to do so. If I could hunt her to her grave, I would. If there was any word of comfort that would be a solace to her in her dying hour, and only I possessed it, I wouldn', 'to set out on his travels I', 'All good attend you, dear old woman, and you too, Mas  shaking hands with me.  m a-going to seek her, fur and wide. If she should come home while I t like to be!--or if I should bring her back, my meaning is, that she and me shall live and die where no one can', 'I', 'Ah, Copperfield? You know this gentleman, I believe?', 'I hope, that you are doing well?', 'It can hardly be interesting to you, Yes, if you wish to know.', 'And you, I am sorry to observe that you have lost your husband.', 'It  replied Peggotty, trembling from head to foot. ', 'Ha! that', 'I have not worn anybody  said Peggotty, ', 'We are not likely to encounter soon again;--a source of satisfaction to us both, no doubt, for such meetings as this can never be agreeable. I do not expect that you, who always rebelled against my just authority, exerted for your benefit and reformation, should owe me any good-will now. There is an antipathy between us--', 'An old one, I believe?', 'It rankled in your baby breast, It embittered the life of your poor mother. You are right. I hope you may do better, yet; I hope you may correct yourself.', 'Gentlemen of Mr. Spenlow  With that, he paid the money for his licence; and, receiving it neatly folded from Mr. Spenlow, together with a shake of the hand, and a polite wish for his happiness and the lady', 'Miss Trotwood, is very firm, no doubt, and not likely to give way to opposition. I have an admiration for her character, and I may congratulate you, Copperfield, on being on the right side. Differences between relations are much to be deplored--but they are extremely general--and the great thing is, to be on the right side', 'Rather a good marriage this, I believe?', 'Indeed! Speaking from the few words Mr. Murdstone dropped--as a man frequently does on these occasions--and from what Miss Murdstone let fall, I should say it was rather a good marriage.', 'Do you mean that there is money, sir?', 'Yes, I understand there', 'Indeed! Is his new wife young?', 'Just of age, So lately, that I should think they had been waiting for that.', 'Lord deliver her!', 'Yes, That', 'Oh, thank you, Mr. Copperfield! What dear flowers!', 'You  said Dora,  s marriage, and will be away at least three weeks. Isn', 'She is the most disagreeable thing I ever saw, You can', 'Yes, I can, my dear!', 'YOU can, perhaps, love, s. ', 'Forgive my not excepting you, my dear, at first.', 'Mr. Copperfield, you are dull.', 'And Dora, YOU are dull.', 'Mr. Copperfield and Dora, Enough of this. Do not allow a trivial misunderstanding to wither the blossoms of spring, which, once put forth and blighted, cannot be renewed. I speak, from experience of the past--the remote, irrevocable past. The gushing fountains which sparkle in the sun, must not be stopped in mere caprice; the oasis in the desert of Sahara must not be plucked up idly.', 'Mr. Copperfield, come to this side of the carriage a moment--if you can spare a moment. I want to speak to you.', 'Dora is coming to stay with me. She is coming home with me the day after tomorrow. If you would like to call, I am sure papa would be happy to see you. s head, and store Miss Mills', 'You must come in, Copperfield, and rest!', 'Affection', 'I hope your poor horse was not tired, when he got home at night, It was a long way for him.', 'It was a long way for him, for he had nothing to uphold him on the journey.', 'Wasn', 'Ye-yes, he was well taken care of. I mean he had not the unutterable happiness that I had in being so near you.', 'You didn', 'So much of my voice has lately been heard in the land, that I might have been contented with troubling you no further from my present standing-point, were it not a duty with which I henceforth charge myself, not only here but on every suitable occasion, whatsoever and wheresoever, to express my high and grateful sense of my second reception in America, and to bear my honest testimony to the national generosity and magnanimity. Also, to declare how astounded I have been by the amazing changes I have seen around me on every side--changes moral, changes physical, changes in the amount of land subdued and peopled, changes in the rise of vast new cities, changes in the growth of older cities almost out of recognition, changes in the graces and amenities of life, changes in the Press, without whose advancement no advancement can take place anywhere. Nor am I, believe me, so arrogant as to suppose that in five-and-twenty years there have been no changes in me, and that I had nothing to learn and no extreme impressions to correct when I was here first. And this brings me to a point on which I have, ever since I landed in the United States last November, observed a strict silence, though sometimes tempted to break it, but in reference to which I will, with your good leave, take you into my confidence now. Even the Press, being human, may be sometimes mistaken or misinformed, and I rather think that I have in one or two rare instances observed its information to be not strictly accurate with reference to myself. Indeed, I have, now and again, been more surprised by printed news that I have read of myself, than by any printed news that I have ever read in my present state of existence. Thus, the vigour and perseverance with which I have for some months past been collecting materials for, and hammering away at, a new book on America has much astonished me; seeing that all that time my declaration has been perfectly well known to my publishers on both sides of the Atlantic, that no consideration on earth would induce me to write one. But what I have intended, what I have resolved upon (and this is the confidence I seek to place in you), is, on my return to England, in my own person, in my own Journal, to bear, for the behoof of my countrymen, such testimony to the gigantic changes in this country as I have hinted at to-night. Also, to record that wherever I have been, in the smallest places equally with the largest, I have been received with unsurpassable politeness, delicacy, sweet temper, hospitality, consideration, and with unsurpassable respect for the privacy daily enforced upon me by the nature of my avocation here and the state of my health. This testimony, so long as I live, and so long as my descendants have any legal right in my books, I shall cause to be republished, as an appendix to every copy of those two books of mine in which I have referred to America. And this I will do and cause to be done, not in mere love and thankfulness, but because I regard it as an act of plain justice and honour.', 'I have my eye upon the rascal now', 'Miss,', 'Miss,', 'person', 'I think so,', "Why's a man in jail like a man out of jail?", "Why's a man in jail like a man out of jail?", 'My dear Pinch, I often think of you,', "We're going to-night, my man. Are you, sir? Perhaps you'd like the bill got ready, sir? Oh no, my man, you needn't mind that. I'll give Pecksniff orders to see to that. Thankee, sir, you're very kind to honour us so far, but as we don't know any particular good of you, and you don't travel with luggage, and Mr Pecksniff an't at home (which perhaps you mayn't happen to be aware of, sir), we should prefer something more satisfactory;", "We're going to-night, my man. Are you, sir? Perhaps you'd like the bill got ready, sir? Oh no, my man, you needn't mind that. I'll give Pecksniff orders to see to that. Thankee, sir, you're very kind to honour us so far, but as we don't know any particular good of you, and you don't travel with luggage, and Mr Pecksniff an't at home (which perhaps you mayn't happen to be aware of, sir), we should prefer something more satisfactory;", 'This is indeed weakness.', 'Mrs Todgers, this day week we part, in consequence of the cheese,', 'Do other men, for they would do you.', 'Pinch is a clever fellow; I approve of Pinch;', "Mark my words, Pinch. When my father's executors cash up", "Then, I'll give you a dinner, Pinch, and come down to Salisbury on purpose.", 'Come back again next week,', 'Have I thought of it?', 'My dear Tom Pinch.', 'My dear Tom Pinch--I address this under cover to Mrs Lupin, at the Blue Dragon, and have begged her in a short note to deliver it to you without saying anything about it elsewhere; and to do the same with all future letters she may receive from me. My reason for so doing will be at once apparent to you', 'Now, my dear Pinch, I am going to repose great trust in you, knowing that I may do so with perfect reliance on your honour and secrecy, and having nobody else just now to trust in.', 'secrecy. I shall not only', 'I shall not only enclose my letters to the young lady of whom I have told you, to your charge, to be forwarded as she may request; but I most earnestly commit her, the young lady herself, to your care and regard, in the event of your meeting in my absence. I have reason to think that the probabilities of your encountering each other--perhaps very frequently--are now neither remote nor few; and although in our position you can do very little to lessen the uneasiness of hers, I trust to you implicitly to do that much, and so deserve the confidence I have reposed in you.', 'Knowing that I need not impress the nature and extent of that confidence upon you at any greater length, as it is already sufficiently established in your mind, I will only say, in bidding you farewell and looking forward to our next meeting, that I shall charge myself from this time, through all changes for the better, with your advancement and happiness, as if they were my own. You may rely upon that. And always believe me, my dear Tom Pinch, faithfully your friend, Martin Chuzzlewit. P.S.--I enclose the amount which you so kindly', 'owners,', 'Suturb,', 'raised', 'home,', "Mrs Harris, Mrs Harris, leave the bottle on the chimley-piece, and don't ask me to take none, but let me put my lips to it when I am so dispoged, and then I will do what I'm engaged to do, according to the best of my ability. Mrs Gamp, if ever there was a sober creetur to be got at eighteen pence a day for working people, and three and six for gentlefolks--night watching, being a extra charge--you are that inwallable person. Mrs Harris, don't name the charge, for if I could afford to lay all my feller creeturs out for nothink, I would gladly do it, sich is the love I bears 'em. But what I always says to them as has the management of matters, Mrs Harris be they gents or be they ladies, is, don't ask me whether I won't take none, or whether I will, but leave the bottle on the chimley-piece, and let me put my lips to it when I am so dispoged.", "Mrs Gamp, if ever there was a sober creetur to be got at eighteen pence a day for working people, and three and six for gentlefolks--night watching, being a extra charge--you are that inwallable person. Mrs Harris, don't name the charge, for if I could afford to lay all my feller creeturs out for nothink, I would gladly do it, sich is the love I bears 'em. But what I always says to them as has the management of matters, Mrs Harris be they gents or be they ladies, is, don't ask me whether I won't take none, or whether I will, but leave the bottle on the chimley-piece, and let me put my lips to it when I am so dispoged.", "'--here she kept her eye on Mr Pecksniff--'", 'I never will give my hand, papa unless my heart is won.', 'Yes,', 'Delicious music!', 'I believe you live with Mr Pecksniff, sir?', "Wasn't there a bridle road to Mr Pecksniff's house?", 'Without going by the Dragon?', 'jolly', "Am I rightly informed, that you're a-going to the Walley of Eden? I heard some talk on it, Oh! if you should ever happen to go to bed there--you MAY, you know, in course of time as civilisation progresses--don't forget to take a axe with you. Fleas? And more, Wampires? And more, Musquitoes, perhaps? And more, What more? Snakes more, rattle-snakes. You're right to a certain extent, stranger. There air some catawampous chawers in the small way too, as graze upon a human pretty strong; but don't mind THEM--they're company. It's snakes, as you'll object to; and whenever you wake and see one in a upright poster on your bed, like a corkscrew with the handle off a-sittin' on its bottom ring, cut him down, for he means wenom.", "Musquitoes, perhaps? And more, What more? Snakes more, rattle-snakes. You're right to a certain extent, stranger. There air some catawampous chawers in the small way too, as graze upon a human pretty strong; but don't mind THEM--they're company. It's snakes, as you'll object to; and whenever you wake and see one in a upright poster on your bed, like a corkscrew with the handle off a-sittin' on its bottom ring, cut him down, for he means wenom.", 'SIR--I address you on behalf of the Watertoast Association of United Sympathisers. It is founded, sir, in the great republic of America! and now holds its breath, and swells the blue veins in its forehead nigh to bursting, as it watches, sir, with feverish intensity and sympathetic ardour, your noble efforts in the cause of Freedom.', 'General, U.S.M.', 'Cain, a Mystery,', 'Welcome to my humble roof!', 'Welcome to my humble roof!', 'I am sick. I am sinking. Come to me!', 'I am sick. I am sinking. Come to me!', "Years and our trials, Mrs Gamp, sets marks upon us all. Say not the words, Mrs Harris, if you and me is to be continual friends, for sech is not the case. Mrs Mould, is one of them that goes agen the obserwation straight; and never, Mrs Harris, whilst I've a drop of breath to draw, will I set by, and not stand up, don't think it. I ast your pardon, ma'am, and I humbly grant your grace; for if ever a woman lived as would see her feller creeturs into fits to serve her friends, well do I know that woman's name is Sairey Gamp.", "and I humbly grant your grace; for if ever a woman lived as would see her feller creeturs into fits to serve her friends, well do I know that woman's name is Sairey Gamp.", "Sairey Gamp, you raly do amaze me! Mrs Harris, why so? Give it a name, I beg. Telling the truth then, ma'am, and shaming him as shall be nameless betwixt you and me, never did I think till I know'd you, as any woman could sick-nurse and monthly likeways, on the little that you takes to drink. Mrs Harris, none on us knows what we can do till we tries; and wunst, when me and Gamp kept 'ouse, I thought so too. But now, my half a pint of porter fully satisfies; perwisin', Mrs Harris, that it is brought reg'lar, and draw'd mild. Whether I sicks or monthlies, ma'am, I hope I does my duty, but I am but a poor woman, and I earns my living hard; therefore I DO require it, which I makes confession, to be brought reg'lar and draw'd mild.", "why so? Give it a name, I beg. Telling the truth then, ma'am, and shaming him as shall be nameless betwixt you and me, never did I think till I know'd you, as any woman could sick-nurse and monthly likeways, on the little that you takes to drink. Mrs Harris, none on us knows what we can do till we tries; and wunst, when me and Gamp kept 'ouse, I thought so too. But now, my half a pint of porter fully satisfies; perwisin', Mrs Harris, that it is brought reg'lar, and draw'd mild. Whether I sicks or monthlies, ma'am, I hope I does my duty, but I am but a poor woman, and I earns my living hard; therefore I DO require it, which I makes confession, to be brought reg'lar and draw'd mild.", "my half a pint of porter fully satisfies; perwisin', Mrs Harris, that it is brought reg'lar, and draw'd mild. Whether I sicks or monthlies, ma'am, I hope I does my duty, but I am but a poor woman, and I earns my living hard; therefore I DO require it, which I makes confession, to be brought reg'lar and draw'd mild.", 'let Mrs Gamp take care of him till I come home;', "The soberest person going, and the best of blessings in a sick room, is Mrs Gamp. Send a boy to Kingsgate Street, and snap her up at any price, for Mrs Gamp is worth her weight and more in goldian guineas. bein' in a light place where you are, and this job promising so well, why not unite the two? No, sir, not unbeknown to Mr Mould, and therefore do not think it. But I will go to Mr Mould, and ast him, if you like.", 'One, two, buckle my shoe, three, four, shut the door, five, six, picking up sticks.', 'in testimony, of the unremitting zeal, talent, and attention of my friend and medical attendant, John Jobling, Esquire, M.R.C.S., Jobling, God bless you!', 'inquiries', "By Gad, Wolf, I've got a living to bestow, and if you had but been brought up at the University, strike me blind if I wouldn't have made a parson of you!", "Here's Pip. Ask Pip. Pip's our mutual friend. Ask Pip. He knows. Damme! I appeal to Pip then. Come, Pip. Bandy or not bandy? Speak out! Bandy, your Grace, by the Lord Harry! Ha, ha! To be sure she is. Bravo, Pip. Well said Pip. I wish I may die if you're not a trump, Pip. Pop me down among your fashionable visitors whenever I'm in town, Pip.", "Bandy, your Grace, by the Lord Harry! Ha, ha! To be sure she is. Bravo, Pip. Well said Pip. I wish I may die if you're not a trump, Pip. Pop me down among your fashionable visitors whenever I'm in town, Pip.", "You'll have a party? No, I won't, he shall take us in the rough!", "What's the editor's name, what's the editor's name? Wolf. Wolf, eh? Sharp biter, Wolf. We must keep the Wolf from the door, as the proverb says.", "Where's Pip? I want to see Pip. Produce Pip! What's the row, my lord? Shakspeare's an infernal humbug, Pip! What's the good of Shakspeare, Pip? I never read him. What the devil is it all about, Pip? There's a lot of feet in Shakspeare's verse, but there an't any legs worth mentioning in Shakspeare's plays, are there, Pip? Juliet, Desdemona, Lady Macbeth, and all the rest of 'em, whatever their names are, might as well have no legs at all, for anything the audience know about it, Pip. Why, in that respect they're all Miss Biffins to the audience, Pip. I'll tell you what it is. What the people call dramatic poetry is a collection of sermons. Do I go to the theatre to be lectured? No, Pip. If I wanted that, I'd go to church. What's the legitimate object of the drama, Pip? Human nature. What are legs? Human nature. Then let us have plenty of leg pieces, Pip, and I'll stand by you, my buck!", "Oh! Sairey Gamp, how is it done? Mrs Harris, ma'am, we gives no trust ourselves, and puts a deal o'trust elsevere; these is our religious feelins, and we finds 'em answer. Sairey, sech is life. Vich likeways is the hend of all things!", "You're not a-goin, Sairey, Lord forgive you! Why am I not a-goin, Mrs Harris? Mrs Gill, wos never wrong with six; and is it likely, ma'am--I ast you as a mother--that she will begin to be unreg'lar now? Often and often have I heerd him say, that he would back his wife agen Moore's almanack, to name the very day and hour, for ninepence farden. IS it likely, ma'am, as she will fail this once? No, ma'am, not in the course of natur. But, you knows much betterer than me, with your experienge, how little puts us out. A Punch's show, a chimbley sweep, a newfundlan dog, or a drunkin man a-comin round the corner sharp may do it.", "Mrs Gill, wos never wrong with six; and is it likely, ma'am--I ast you as a mother--that she will begin to be unreg'lar now? Often and often have I heerd him say, that he would back his wife agen Moore's almanack, to name the very day and hour, for ninepence farden. IS it likely, ma'am, as she will fail this once? No, ma'am, not in the course of natur. But, you knows much betterer than me, with your experienge, how little puts us out. A Punch's show, a chimbley sweep, a newfundlan dog, or a drunkin man a-comin round the corner sharp may do it.", "as she will fail this once? No, ma'am, not in the course of natur. But, you knows much betterer than me, with your experienge, how little puts us out. A Punch's show, a chimbley sweep, a newfundlan dog, or a drunkin man a-comin round the corner sharp may do it.", 'hus?', 'He was a member of the Congress of our common country, and was ac-Tive in his trust.', 'What ho! arrest for me that Agency. Go, bring it here!', 'May you ever be as firm, sir, as your marble statter! May it ever be as great a terror Toe its ene-mies as you.', "For you're used to it, you were always a-cooking for everybody on your passage out.", "If that's so, why, bring a glass of rum;", 'doing', 'if he will allow me to call him so,', "a quiet, cheerful family, I want such and such a thing, and I can't get it, and I don't expect I ever shall!", 'at present', 'Mrs Todgers, I am very low to-day; I think that I shall soon be dead,', 'A respectable young man, aged thirty-five', 'Come in!', 'Mr Westlock? That is my name, The favour of a few words with you? Pray be seated, sir,', 'I believe you are acquainted, sir, with Mr Thomas Pinch?', 'Then, I think I can accommodate him.', 'think I can accommodate him.', "I must be perfectly aware, that to any person who had ever been in Mr Pecksniff's neighbourhood, Mr Thomas Pinch and his acquirements were as well known as the Church steeple, or the Blue Dragon.", 'You know the Blue Dragon, Mr Westlock; you kept it up there, once or twice, yourself.', "Oh Sairey, Sairey, little do we know wot lays afore us! Mrs Harris, ma'am, not much, it's true, but more than you suppoge. Our calcilations, ma'am, respectin' wot the number of a family will be, comes most times within one, and oftener than you would suppoge, exact. Sairey, Tell me wot is my indiwidgle number. No, Mrs Harris, ex-cuge me, if you please. My own, has fallen out of three-pair backs, and had damp doorsteps settled on their lungs, and one was turned up smilin' in a bedstead unbeknown. Therefore, ma'am, seek not to proticipate, but take 'em as they come and as they go.", "respectin' wot the number of a family will be, comes most times within one, and oftener than you would suppoge, exact. Sairey, Tell me wot is my indiwidgle number. No, Mrs Harris, ex-cuge me, if you please. My own, has fallen out of three-pair backs, and had damp doorsteps settled on their lungs, and one was turned up smilin' in a bedstead unbeknown. Therefore, ma'am, seek not to proticipate, but take 'em as they come and as they go.", "has fallen out of three-pair backs, and had damp doorsteps settled on their lungs, and one was turned up smilin' in a bedstead unbeknown. Therefore, ma'am, seek not to proticipate, but take 'em as they come and as they go.", "Sairey, is it a public wharf? Mrs Harris, can you doubt it? You have know'd me now, ma'am, eight and thirty year; and did you ever know me go, or wish to go, where I was not made welcome, say the words. No, Sairey, contrairy quite.", "Sing'lar Tenacity of Life in a Quadruped.", "I haven't done nothing under-handed, I haven't been skulking about the premises, here I am, for-give me, I ask your pardon, God Bless You!", 'Go forth!', 'bringing', 'bringing', "Oh, Mrs Harris, ma'am! your countenance is quite a angel's! No, Sairey Gamp, you best of hard-working and industrious creeturs as ever was underpaid at any price, which underpaid you are, quite diff'rent. Harris had it done afore marriage at ten and six, and wore it faithful next his heart till the colour run, when the money was declined to be give back, and no arrangement could be come to. But he never said it was a angel's, Sairey, wotever he might have thought.", 'Where is Sairey Gamp?', 'He was a man as might have come out strong if he could have got a chance. But it was denied him.', "Let me do that as has the least credit in it of all; marry a dear, sweet creetur, as is wery fond of me; me bein', at the same time, wery fond of her; lead a happy life, and struggle no more again' the blight which settles on my prospects.", 'yes,', 'Drugs,', "I'm easy pleased; it is but little as I wants; but I must have that little of the best, and to the minute when the clock strikes, else we do not part as I could wish, but bearin' malice in our arts.", 'Send for Sairey?', 'Send for Sairey?', "Mrs Gamp, WILL you undertake it? We couldn't think, of trusting him to nobody but you, for, Sairey, you are gold as has passed the furnage. Will you undertake it, at your own price, day and night, and by your own self? No, I will not. Do not reckon on it. There is, but one creetur in the world as I would undertake on sech terms, and her name is Harris. But, I am acquainted with a friend, whose name is Betsey Prig, that I can recommend, and will assist me. Betsey, is always to be trusted under me, and will be guided as I could desire.", 'What, Sairey Gamp! debage yourself to HER!', 'Oh, Chuff, oh, dear old Chuff! a voice came into my room to-night, and told me that this crime began with me. It began when I taught him to be too covetous of what I have to leave, and made the expectation of it his great business!', "He shall not weary for my death, Chuff; He shall not weary for my death, Chuff. He shall have it now; he shall marry where he has a fancy, Chuff, although it don't please me; and you and I will go away and live upon a little. I always loved him; perhaps he'll love me then. It's a dreadful thing to have my own child thirsting for my death. But I might have known it. I have sown, and I must reap. He shall believe that I am taking this; and when I see that he is sorry, and has all he wants, I'll tell him that I found it out, and I'll forgive him. He'll make a better man of his own son, and be a better man himself, perhaps, Chuff!", 'Spare him, Chuff! Spare him, Chuff!', 'Can you be here by seven in the morning? Can you be here by ten in the morning? Yes', 'Can you be here by ten in the morning? Yes', 'This was not well. This was not well, sir!', 'prefers not', 'It is a very long way from here, my child.', 'I know that, sir, I am afraid it is a very long way, for I came from there to-night.', 'Alone?', 'Oh, yes, I don', 'And what made you ask it of me? Suppose I should tell you wrong?', 'I am sure you will not do that,  you are such a very old gentleman, and walk so slow yourself.', 'Come, I', 'Who has sent you so far by yourself?', 'Someone who is very kind to me, sir.', 'And what have you been doing?', 'That, I must not tell,', 'Why, bless thee, child, how couldst thou miss thy way? What if I had lost thee, Nell!', 'how couldst thou miss thy way? What if I had lost thee, Nell!', 'I would have found my way back to YOU, grandfather, never fear.', 'You must be tired, sir, how can I thank you?', 'how can I thank you?', 'By taking more care of your grandchild another time, my good friend,', 'More care! more care of Nelly! Why, who ever loved a child as I love Nell?', 'I don', 'I don  cried the old man interrupting me,  t consider her! Ah, how little you know of the truth! Little Nelly, little Nelly!', 'It always grieves me, it always grieves me to contemplate the initiation of children into the ways of life, when they are scarcely more than infants. It checks their confidence and simplicity--two of the best qualities that Heaven gives them--and demands that they share our sorrows before they are capable of entering into our enjoyments.', 'It will never check hers, the springs are too deep. Besides, the children of the poor know but few pleasures. Even the cheap delights of childhood must be bought and paid for.', 'the springs are too deep. Besides, the children of the poor know but few pleasures. Even the cheap delights of childhood must be bought and paid for.', 'But--forgive me for saying this--you are surely not so very poor', 'She is not my child, sir, Her mother was, and she was poor. I save nothing--not a penny--though I live as you see, but she shall be rich one of these days, and a fine lady. Don t consider! why, God knows that this one child is the thought and object of my life, and yet he never prospers me--no, never!', 'Foolish Nell! She always laughs at poor Kit.', 'A long way, wasn', 'Why, then, it was a goodish stretch, master,', 'Of course you have come back hungry?', 'Why, then, I do consider myself rather so, master,', 'Ah! you don t consider her.', 'You must not attach too great weight to a remark founded on first appearances, my friend,', 'No, no. Come hither, Nell.', 'Do I love thee, Nell? Say--do I love thee, Nell, or no?', 'Why dost thou sob? Is it because thou know', 'Indeed, indeed you do, Kit knows you do.', 'She is poor now s cheek, ', 'I am very happy as I am, grandfather,', 'Tush, tush! thou dost not know--how should  then he muttered again between his teeth, ', 'One moment, sir, Now, Kit--near midnight, boy, and you still here! Get home, get home, and be true to your time in the morning, for there', 'Good night, Kit,', 'Good night, Miss Nell,', 'And thank this gentleman, but for whose care I might have lost my little girl to-night.', 'No, no, master, that won t.', 'What do you mean?', 'I  said Kit,  d have found her. I d find her if she was above ground, I would, as quick as anybody, master. Ha, ha, ha!', 'I haven', 'Ay, sir, What is it?', 'This delicate child, with so much beauty and intelligence--has she nobody to care for her but you? Has she no other companion or advisor?', 'No, no, and she wants no other.', 'But are you not fearful, that you may misunderstand a charge so tender? I am sure you mean well, but are you quite certain that you know how to execute such a trust as this? I am an old man, like you, and I am actuated by an old man', 'Sir, s silence. s a weary life for an old man--a weary, weary life--but there is a great end to gain and that I keep before me.', 'Those are not mine, my dear,', 'No, they are grandfather', 'But he is not going out to-night.', 'Oh, yes, he is,', 'And what becomes of you, my pretty one?', 'Me! I stay here of course. I always do.', 'Sleep soundly, Nell, and angels guard thy bed! Do not forget thy prayers, my sweet.', 'No, indeed, they make me feel so happy!', 'That  said the old man. ', 'You  returned the child. ', 'Stay here of course, I always do!', 'You interrupted us at a critical moment, this fellow will murder me one of these days. He would have done so, long ago, if he had dared.', 'Bah! You would swear away my life if you could, we all know that!', 'I almost think I could, If oaths, or prayers, or words, could rid me of you, they should. I would be quit of you, and would be relieved if you were dead.', 'If oaths, or prayers, or words, could rid me of you, they should. I would be quit of you, and would be relieved if you were dead.', 'I know it, I said so, didn', 'And his mother died! and this is Heaven', 'Justice or no justice, here I am and here I shall stop till such time as I think fit to go, unless you send for assistance to put me out--which you won', 'YOUR sister!', 'Ah! You can  returned the other.  d have done it long ago. I want to see my sister, that you keep cooped up here, poisoning her mind with your sly secrets and pretending an affection for her that you may work her to death, and add a few scraped shillings every week to the money you can hardly count. I want to see her; and I will.', 'Here s a generous spirit to scorn scraped-up shillings! A profligate, sir, who has forfeited every claim not only upon those who have the misfortune to be of his blood, but upon society which knows nothing of him but his misdeeds. A liar too, who knows how dear she is to me, and seeks to wound me even there, because there is a stranger nearby.', 'Strangers are nothing to me, grandfather, nor I to them, I hope. The best they can do, is to keep an eye to their business and leave me to mine. There ll call him in, with your leave.', 'There. It  said the young fellow, pushing him in. ', 'Sit down, Swiveller.', 'But is the old min agreeable?', 'But what, what is the odds so long as the fire of soul is kindled at the taper of conwiviality, and the wing of friendship never moults a feather! What is the odds so long as the spirit is expanded by means of rosy wine, and the present moment is the least happiest of our existence!', 'You needn', 'Fred! a word to the wise is sufficient for them--we may be good and happy without riches, Fred. Say not another syllable. I know my cue; smart is the word. Only one little whisper, Fred--is the old min friendly?', 'Never you mind,', 'Right again, quite right, caution is the word, and caution is the act.', 'Fred, is the old min friendly?', 'is the old min friendly?', 'What does it matter?', 'No, but IS he?', 'Yes, of course. What do I care whether he is or not?', 'It  said Mr Swiveller, ', 'Hold your tongue,', 'Sir, don re as rich as rich can be; you have been at no uncommon expense on my account, you t you stand a trifle for your grown-up relation?" The jolly old grandfather unto this, retorts, not only that he declines to fork out with that cheerful readiness which is always so agreeable and pleasant in a gentleman of his time of life, but that he will bow up, and call names, and make reflections whenever they meet. Then the plain question is, an', 'Why do you hunt and persecute me, God help me! Why do you bring your prolifigate companions here? How often am I to tell you that my life is one of care and self-denial, and that I am poor?', 'How often am I to tell you, that I know better?', 'You have chosen your own path, Follow it.  Leave Nell and me to toil and work.', 'Nell will be a woman soon, and, bred in your faith, she', 'Take care, that she does not forget you when you would have her memory keenest. Take care that the day don', 'You mean when she has your money? How like a poor man he talks!', 'And yet, how poor we are, and what a life it is! The cause is a young child', 'Ah! that should be your grandson, neighbour!', 'Say rather that he should not be, But he is.', 'And that?', 'Some friend of his, as welcome here as he,', 'And that?', 'A gentleman who was so good as to bring Nell home the other night when she lost her way, coming from your house.', 'Well, Nelly, Do they teach you to hate me, eh?', 'No, no. For shame. Oh, no!', 'To love me, perhaps?', 'To do neither, They never speak to me about you. Indeed they never do.', 'I dare be bound for that, I dare be bound for that Nell. Oh! I believe you there!', 'But I love you dearly, Fred,', 'No doubt!', 'I do indeed, and always will, but oh! If you would leave off vexing him and making him unhappy, then I could love you more.', 'but oh! If you would leave off vexing him and making him unhappy, then I could love you more.', 'I see! There--get you away now you have said your lesson. You needn s the matter.', 'Harkee, Mr--', 'Meaning me? Quilp is my name. You might remember. It', 'Harkee, Mr Quilp, then, You have some influence with my grandfather there.', 'Some,', 'And are in a few of his mysteries and secrets.', 'A few,', 'Then let me tell him once for all, through you, that I will come into and go out of this place as often as I like, so long as he keeps Nell here; and that if he wants to be quit of me, he must first be quit of her. What have I done to be made a bugbear of, and to be shunned and dreaded as if I brought the plague? He s my point. I came here to-day to maintain it, and I s ended. Come Dick.', 'Stop! Sir!', 'Sir!', 'Sir, I am your humble servant,', 'Before I leave the gay and festive scene, and halls of dazzling light, sir, I will with your permission, attempt a slight remark. I came here, sir, this day, under the impression that the old min was friendly.', 'Proceed, sir,', 'Inspired by this idea and the sentiments it awakened, sir, and feeling as a mutual friend that badgering, baiting, and bullying, was not the sort of thing calculated to expand the souls and promote the social harmony of the contending parties, I took upon myself to suggest a course which is THE course to be adopted to the present occasion.  Will you allow me to whisper half a syllable, sir?', 'The watch-word to the old min is--fork.', 'Is what?', 'Is fork, sir, fork, You are awake, sir?', 'Humph! so much for dear relations. Thank God I acknowledge none! Nor need you either, if you were not as weak as a reed, and nearly as senseless.', 'so much for dear relations. Thank God I acknowledge none! Nor need you either, if you were not as weak as a reed, and nearly as senseless.', 'What would you have me do? It is easy to talk and sneer. What would you have me do?', 'What would I do if I was in your case?', 'Something violent, no doubt.', 'You  returned the little man, highly gratified by the compliment, for such he evidently considered it; and grinning like a devil as he rubbed his dirty hands together.  s peace till I return. I know she m away, thought she doesn t be angry with her.  Oh! well-trained Mrs Quilp.', 'Here, I brought it myself for fear of accidents, as, being in gold, it was something large and heavy for Nell to carry in her bag. She need be accustomed to such loads betimes though, neighbor, for she will carry weight when you are dead.', 'Heaven send she may! I hope so,', 'Hope so! neighbour, I would I knew in what good investment all these supplies are sunk. But you are a deep man, and keep your secret close.', 'My secret! Yes, you', 'And so, neighbour, I t expect.', 'I  he said; ', 'When I think, of the many years--many in thy short life--that thou has lived with me; of my monotonous existence, knowing no companions of thy own age nor any childish pleasures; of the solitude in which thou has grown to be what thou art, and in which thou hast lived apart from nearly all thy kind but one old man; I sometimes fear I have dealt hardly by thee, Nell.', 'Grandfather!', 'Not in intention--no no, I have ever looked forward to the time that should enable thee to mix among the gayest and prettiest, and take thy station with the best. But I still look forward, Nell, I still look forward, and if I should be forced to leave thee, meanwhile, how have I fitted thee for struggles with the world? The poor bird yonder is as well qualified to encounter it, and be turned adrift upon its mercies--Hark! I hear Kit outside. Go to him, Nell, go to him.', 'A word in your ear, sir, I have been rendered uneasy by what you said the other night, and can only plead that I have done all for the best--that it is too late to retract, if I could (though I cannot)--and that I hope to triumph yet. All is for her sake. I have borne great poverty myself, and would spare her the sufferings that poverty carries with it. I would spare her the miseries that brought her mother, my own dear child, to an early grave. I would leave her--not with resources which could be easily spent or squandered away, but with what would place her beyond the reach of want for ever. You mark me sir? She shall have no pittance, but a fortune--Hush! I can say no more than that, now or at any other time, and she is here again!', 'Ah! I wish you --Mrs Quilp had been a Miss Jiniwin it should be observed-- am, what us women owe to ourselves.', 'Owe indeed, ma  replied Mrs Jiniwin.  d have-- You quite enter into my feelings, ma s jist what I', 'But you have no call to do it, Luckily for you, you have no more occasion to do it than I had.', 'No woman need have, if she was true to herself,', 'Do you hear that, Betsy? How often have I said the same words to you, and almost gone down my knees when I spoke ', 'Very well, as I said just now, it m sure--Quilp has such a way with him when he likes, that the best looking woman here couldn', 'Mother knows, that what I say is quite correct, for she often said so before we were married. Didn', 'Oh! It  exclaimed the old lady.  t, and more', 'Before I  said Mrs George,  d consent to stand in awe of a man as she does of him, I d kill myself, and write a letter first to say he did it!', 'Mr Quilp may be a very nice man, and I supposed there', 'If he is! If he is! He is the greatest tyrant that every lived, she daren t the spirit to give him a word back, no, not a single word.', 'Go on, ladies, go on, Mrs Quilp, pray ask the ladies to stop to supper, and have a couple of lobsters and something light and palatable.', 'I--I--didn  stammered his wife.  s quite an accident.', 'So much the better, Mrs Quilp; these accidental parties are always the pleasantest, What! Not going, ladies, you are not going, surely!', 'And why not stop to supper, Quilp, if my daughter had a mind?', 'To be sure, Why not?', 'There', 'Surely not, Why should there be? Nor anything unwholesome, either, unless there m told are not good for digestion.', 'And you wouldn', 'Not for a score of worlds, Not even to have a score of mothers-in-law at the same time--and what a blessing that would be!', 'My daughter  said the old lady with a giggle, meant for satirical and to imply that he needed to be reminded of the fact; ', 'So she is, certainly. So she is,', 'And she has a right to do as she likes, I hope, Quilp,', 'Hope she has! Oh! Don', 'I know she ought to have, Quilp, and would have, if she was of my way of thinking.', 'Why an s way of thinking, my dear? why don s the ornament of her sex--your father said so every day of his life. I am sure he did.', 'Her father was a blessed creetur, Quilp, and worthy twenty thousand of some people, twenty hundred million thousand.', 'I should like to have known him, I dare say he was a blessed creature then; but I', 'You look ill, Mrs Jiniwin; I know you have been exciting yourself too much--talking perhaps, for it is your weakness. Go to bed. Do go to bed.', 'I shall go when I please, Quilp, and not before.', 'But please to do now. Do please to go now,', 'Mrs Quilp,', 'Yes, Quilp,', 'Mrs Quilp.', 'Yes, Quilp.', 'If ever you listen to these beldames again, I', 'Now, Mrs Quilp, I feel in a smoking humour, and shall probably blaze away all night. But sit where you are, if you please, in case I want you.', 'Why dear me! it', 'Why, Betsy, you haven t mean to say you', 'Sitting up all night? Yes she has!', 'All night?', 'Ay, all night. Is the dear old lady deaf? Who says man and wife are bad company?  Ha ha! The time has flown.', 'You', 'Come come, you mustn s married now, you know. And though she did beguile the time and keep me from my bed, you must not be so tenderly careful of me as to be out of humour with her.  Bless you for a dear old lady. Here', 'I am much obliged to you, Oh! I', 'Grateful soul! Mrs Quilp.', 'Yes, Quilp,', 'Help your mother to get breakfast, Mrs Quilp. I am going to the wharf this morning--the earlier the better, so be quick.', 'Ah! it was not the towel over my ears, I thought it wasn m a little hunchy villain and a monster, am I, Mrs Jiniwin? Oh!', 'How are you now, my dear old darling?', 'Come, you let me alone, s hand with both his elbows alternatively.  ll get something you won t and so I tell you.', 'You dog, I ll scratch you with a rusty nail, I', 'You won  said the boy, nodding his head and drawing back, with the elbows ready in case of the worst; ', 'Stand still, you dog, I won ve done it as often as I want. Here. Take the key.', 'Why don', 'Where is there one of my size, you dog? Take the key, or I --indeed he gave him a smart tap with the handle as he spoke. ', 'Now, you mind the wharf. Stand upon your head agin, and I', 'Here', 'Who?', 'I don', 'Ask! Ask, you dog.', 'What, Nelly!', 'Yes, s only me, sir.', 'Come in, Come in. Stay. Just look out into the yard, and see whether there', 'No, sir, He', 'You  said Quilp.  s your message, Nelly?', 'Halloa here! Nelly!', 'Yes, sir.', 'Do you know what', 'No, sir!', 'Are you sure, quite sure, quite certain, upon your soul?', 'Quite sure, sir.', 'Do you wish you may die if you do know, hey?', 'Indeed I don', 'Well! I believe you. Humph! Gone already? Gone in four-and-twenty hours! What the devil has he done with it, that', 'You look very pretty to-day, Nelly, charmingly pretty. Are you tired, Nelly?', 'No, sir. I', 'There  said Quilp. ', 'To be what, sir?', 'My number two, Nelly, my second, my Mrs Quilp,', 'To be Mrs Quilp the second, when Mrs Quilp the first is dead, sweet Nell, to be my wife, my little cherry-cheeked, red-lipped wife. Say that Mrs Quilp lives five year, or only four, you t come to be Mrs Quilp of Tower Hill.', 'You shall come with me to Tower Hill and see Mrs Quilp that is, directly, She', 'I must go back indeed, He told me to return directly I had the answer.', 'But you haven  retorted the dwarf,  t have it, and can ll go directly.', 'It  cried Nelly, clasping her hand, ', 'I em, I em. Now, my boys, fight away. I ll take both of you, both together, both together!', 'I  said Quilp, vainly endeavoring to get near either of them for a parting blow.  ll bruise you until you ll break your faces till you haven', 'Come, you drop that stick or it  said his boy, dodging round him and watching an opportunity to rush in; ', 'Come a little nearer, and I  said Quilp, with gleaming eyes; ', 'Never mind, you see if ever I offer to strike anybody again because they say you s all.', 'Do you mean to say, I', 'No!', 'Then what do you fight on my wharf for, you villain?', 'Because he said so, not because you an', 'Then why did he say, that Miss Nelly was ugly, and that she and my master was obliged to do whatever his master liked?  Why did he say that?', 'He said what he did because he re very wise and clever--almost too clever to live, unless you  said Quilp, with great suavity in his manner, but still more of quiet malice about his eyes and mouth.  s sixpence for you, Kit. Always speak the truth.  At all times, Kit, speak the truth. Lock the counting-house, you dog, and bring me the key.', 'Here', 'Here  said her husband.  ll sit with you, my soul, while I write a letter.', 'Mind what I say to you, See if you can get out of her anything about her grandfather, or what they do, or how they live, or what he tells her. I ll win upon her. Do you hear?', 'Yes, Quilp.', 'Go then. What', 'Dear Quilp, I love the child--if you could do without making me deceive her--', 'Do you hear me, worm yourself into her secrets; I know you can. I re not sharp enough, I', 'How very often you have come backwards and forwards lately to Mr Quilp, my dear.', 'I have said so to grandfather, a hundred times,', 'And what has he said to that?', 'Only sighed, and dropped his head, and seemed so sad and wretched that if you could have seen him I am sure you must have cried; you could not have helped it more than I, I know. How that door creaks!', 'It often does. But your grandfather--he used not to be so wretched?', 'But your grandfather--he used not to be so wretched?', 'Oh, no! so different! We were once so happy and he so cheerful and contented! You cannot think what a sad change has fallen on us since.', 'I am very, very sorry, to hear you speak like this, my dear!', 'Thank you, you are always kind to me, and it is a pleasure to talk to you. I can speak to no one else about him, but poor Kit. I am very happy still, I ought to feel happier perhaps than I do, but you cannot think how it grieves me sometimes to see him alter so.', 'He  said Mrs Quilp, ', 'Oh, if God would only let that come about! but it is a long time now, since he first began to--I thought I saw that door moving!', 'It  said Mrs Quilp, faintly. ', 'To be so thoughtful and dejected, and to forget our old way of spending the time in the long evenings, I used to read to him by the fireside, and he sat listening, and when I stopped and we began to talk, he told me about my mother, and how she once looked and spoke just like me when she was a little child. Then he used to take me on his knee, and try to make me understand that she was not lying in her grave, but had flown to a beautiful country beyond the sky where nothing died or ever grew old--we were very happy once!', 'Nelly, Nelly! I can t cry.', 'I do so very seldom, but I have kept this to myself a long time, and I am not quite well, I think, for the tears come into my eyes and I cannot keep them back. I don', 'Then, we often walked in the fields and among the green trees, and when we came home at night, we liked it better for being tired, and said what a happy place it was. And if it was dark and rather dull, we used to say, what did it matter to us, for it only made us remember our last walk with greater pleasure, and look forward to our next one. But now we never have these walks, and though it is the same house it is darker and much more gloomy than it used to be, indeed!', 'Mind you don  said the child earnestly, ', 'I am sure he loves you dearly,', 'Indeed, indeed he does! as dearly as I love him. But I have not told you the greatest change of all, and this you must never breathe again to any one. He has no sleep or rest, but that which he takes by day in his easy chair; for every night and nearly all night long he is away from home.', 'Nelly!', 'Hush! When he comes home in the morning, which is generally just before day, I let him in. Last night he was very late, and it was quite light. I saw that his face was deadly pale, that his eyes were bloodshot, and that his legs trembled as he walked. When I had gone to bed again, I heard him groan. I got up and ran back to him, and heard him say, before he knew that I was there, that he could not bear his life much longer, and if it was not for the child, would wish to die. What shall I do! Oh! What shall I do!', 'When he comes home in the morning, which is generally just before day, I let him in. Last night he was very late, and it was quite light. I saw that his face was deadly pale, that his eyes were bloodshot, and that his legs trembled as he walked. When I had gone to bed again, I heard him groan. I got up and ran back to him, and heard him say, before he knew that I was there, that he could not bear his life much longer, and if it was not for the child, would wish to die. What shall I do! Oh! What shall I do!', 'She  said the dwarf, squinting in a hideous manner to imply that his wife was to follow his lead.  s a long way from her home to the wharf, and then she was alarmed to see a couple of young scoundrels fighting, and was timorous on the water besides. All this together has been too much for her. Poor Nell!', 'But you', 'I have been away too long, sir, already,', 'Well, if you will go, you will, Nelly. Here s only to say that I shall see him to-morrow or maybe next day, and that I couldn ye hear?', 'You t you, Mrs Quilp?', 'What more could I do?', 'What more could you do! couldn t you have done what you had to do, without appearing in your favourite part of the crocodile, you minx?', 'I am very sorry for the child, Quilp, Surely I ve led her on to tell her secret she supposed we were alone; and you were by, God forgive me.', 'You led her on! You did a great deal truly! What did I tell you about making me creak the door? It ve got the clue I want, for if I hadn d have visited the failure upon you, I can tell you.', 'But you may thank your fortunate stars--the same stars that made you Mrs Quilp--you may thank them that I s track, and have got a new light. So let me hear no more about this matter now or at any other time, and don t be home to it.', 'Fred, remember the once popular melody of Begone dull care; fan the sinking flame of hilarity with the wing of friendship; and pass the rosy wine.', 'Fred! Pass the rosy.', 'I  said his friend, stirring the mixture,  s May the--', 'Pshaw! You worry me to death with your chattering. You can be merry under any circumstances.', 'Why, Mr Trent, there is a proverb which talks about being merry and wise. There are some people who can be merry and can t be merry. I s a good  s better to keep to half of it than none; at all events, I other.', 'Bah!', 'With all my heart, In the polite circles I believe this sort of thing isn  adding to this retort an observation to the effect that his friend appeared to be rather ', 'Gentlemen, I  said Dick with great emphasis,  d for his pains. Hear, hear!', 'Dick! will you talk seriously for two minutes, if I show you a way to make your fortune with very little trouble?', 'You  returned Dick;  em but empty pockets--', 'You  said his companion, drawing his chair to the table. ', 'What about her?', 'She has a pretty face, has she not?', 'Why, certainly, I must say for her that there', 'Has she a pretty face,', 'Yes, she has a pretty face, a very pretty face. What of that?', 'I  returned his friend.  s very plain that the old man and I will remain at daggers drawn to the end of our lives, and that I have nothing to expect from him. You see that, I suppose?', 'A bat might see that, with the sun shining,', 'It', 'I should said it was, unless the way in which I put the case to him, made an impression. It may have done so. It was powerful, Fred.  --that was strong, I thought--very friendly and natural. Did it strike you in that way?', 'It didn  returned the other,  t discuss it. Now look here. Nell is nearly fourteen.', 'Fine girl of her age, but small,', 'If I am to go on, be quiet for one minute, Now I', 'Now I', 'That', 'The girl has strong affections, and brought up as she has been, may, at her age, be easily influenced and persuaded. If I take her in hand, I will be bound by a very little coaxing and threatening to bend her to my will. Not to beat about the bush (for the advantages of the scheme would take a week to tell) what', 'What!', 'I say, what  repeated the other with a steadiness of manner, of the effect of which upon his companion he was well assured by long experience,  s to prevent your marrying her?', 'And she "nearly fourteen"!', 'I don --returned the brother angrily;  s time, in three, in four. Does the old man look like a long-liver?', 'He don  said Dick shaking his head,  s no trusting them, Fred. There t kept her word yet. They s apoplexy in the family, Fred, you can em, and even then they deceive you just as often as not.', 'Look at the worst side of the question then, Suppose he lives.', 'To be sure, There', 'I say, suppose he lives, and I persuaded, or if the word sounds more feasible, forced Nell to a secret marriage with you. What do you think would come of that?', 'A family and an annual income of nothing, to keep ', 'I tell you, that he lives for her, that his whole energies and thoughts are bound up in her, that he would no more disinherit her for an act of disobedience than he would take me into his favour again for any act of obedience or virtue that I could possibly be guilty of. He could not do it. You or any other man with eyes in his head may see that, if he chooses.', 'that he lives for her, that his whole energies and thoughts are bound up in her, that he would no more disinherit her for an act of disobedience than he would take me into his favour again for any act of obedience or virtue that I could possibly be guilty of. He could not do it. You or any other man with eyes in his head may see that, if he chooses.', 'It seems improbable certainly,', 'It seems improbable because it is improbable, If you would furnish him with an additional inducement to forgive you, let there be an irreconcilable breach, a most deadly quarrel, between you and me--let there be a pretense of such a thing, I mean, of course--and he', 'If you would furnish him with an additional inducement to forgive you, let there be an irreconcilable breach, a most deadly quarrel, between you and me--let there be a pretense of such a thing, I mean, of course--and he', 'I suppose there', 'Doubt! Did you hear what he left fall the other day when we were there? Doubt! What will you doubt next, Dick?', 'Her. Who?', 'Sophy Wackles,', 'Who', 'She s what she is, the rosy She s divine. You know her.', 'I remember, What of her?', 'Why, sir, between Miss Sophia Wackles and the humble individual who has now the honor to address you, warm and tender sentiments have been engendered, sentiments of the most honourable and inspiring kind. The Goddess Diana, sir, that calls aloud for the chase, is not more particular in her behavior than Sophia Wackles; I can tell you that.', 'Am I to believe there  demanded his friend;  t mean to say that any love-making has been going on?', 'Love-making, yes. Promising, no, There can be no action for breach, that ve never committed myself in writing, Fred.', 'And what', 'A reminder, Fred, for to-night--a small party of twenty, making two hundred light fantastic toes in all, supposing every lady and gentleman to have the proper complement. I must go, if it ll do it, don s affecting, Fred.', 'May the present moment, be the worst of our lives! I like the plan of sending  s a charm in drawing a potato from its native element (if I may so express it) to which the rich and powerful are strangers. Ah! "Man wants but little here below, nor wants that little long!" How true that is!--after dinner.', 'I hope the eating-house keeper will want but little and that he may not want that little long, ve no means of paying for this!', 'I shall be passing present, and I  said Dick, winking his eye significantly.  s quite helpless. The goods are gone, Fred, and there', 'Is that a reminder, in case you should forget to call?', 'Not exactly, Fred, I enter in this little book the names of the streets that I can s only one avenue to the Strand left often now, and I shall have to stop up that to-night with a pair of gloves. The roads are closing so fast in every direction, that in a month', 'There', 'Why, I hope not, but the average number of letters it take to soften her is six, and this time we have got as far as eight without any effect at all. I m in such a state of mind that I hardly know what I write"--blot--"if you could see me at this minute shedding tears for my past misconduct"--pepper-castor--"my hand trembles when I think"--blot again--if that don s all over.', 'It  said Dick shaking his head with a look of infinite wisdom, and running on (as he was accustomed to do) with scraps of verse as if they were only prose in a hurry;  s a very nice girl. She s newly sprung in June--there s also like a melody that s really very sudden. Not that there s little sister, to turn cool directly, but its better not to go too far. If I begin to cool at all I must begin at once, I see that. There s another. There s no chance of that, but it', 'Too early, no!', 'Oh, my dear, I s a mercy we were not here at four o d hardly believe that he was dressed before dinner-time and has been looking at the clock and teasing me ever since. It', 'I s a mercy we were not here at four o d hardly believe that he was dressed before dinner-time and has been looking at the clock and teasing me ever since. It', 'You must dance with Miss Cheggs, She s quite delightful.', 'Quite delightful, is he? Quite delighted too, I should say, from the manner in which he', 'Jealous! Like his impudence!', 'His impudence, Mr Swiviller! Take care he don', 'Oh, pray, Jane--', 'Nonsense! Why shouldn t already. You know best about that, Sophy!', 'Did you speak to me, sir? Have the kindness to smile, sir, in order that we may not be suspected. Did you speak to me, sir', 'No, sir, I didn', 'No, sir, I didn', 'Perhaps you may have nothing to say to me now, sir,', 'Oh, indeed, sir! I m to be found, I suppose, sir, in case you should have anything to say to me?', 'I can easily inquire, sir, when I want to know.', 'There', 'Nothing more, sir', 'I  said Miss Cheggs approaching once more,  s quite serious and in earnest, that', 'Alick has been saying such things to Sophy. Upon my word, you know, it s clear.', 'What', 'All manner of things, you can', 'My boat is on the shore and my bark is on the sea, but before I pass this door I will say farewell to thee,', 'Are you going?', 'Am I going! Yes, I am. What then?', 'Nothing, except that it  said Miss Sophy; ', 'I would that I had been my own mistress too, before I had ever entertained a thought of you. Miss Wackles, I believed you true, and I was blest in so believing, but now I mourn that e', 'I came here, with my bosom expanded, my heart dilated, and my sentiments of a corresponding description. I go away with feelings that may be conceived but cannot be described, feeling within myself that desolating truth that my best affections have experienced this night a stifler!', 'I am sure I don  said Miss Sophy with downcast eyes.  m very sorry if--', 'Sorry, Ma  said Dick,  s a gratifying circumstance which you d mention it. I have now merely to apologize for trespassing so long upon your attention. Good night.', 'There  said Richard Swiviller to himself when he had reached home and was hanging over the candle with the extinguisher in his hand,  ll be to find me so strong upon it. He shall know all about that to-morrow, and in the meantime, as it ll try and get a wink of the balmy.', 'The balmy', 'Two days, two whole, clear, days have passed, and there is no reply.  What did he tell thee, Nell?', 'Exactly what I told you, dear grandfather, indeed.', 'True, Yes.  But tell me again, Nell.  My head fails me.  What was it that he told thee?  Nothing more than that he would see me to-morrow or next day?  That was in the note.', 'Nothing more, Shall I go to him again to-morrow, dear grandfather?  Very early?  I will be there and back, before breakfast.', "'Twould be of no use, my dear, no earthly use.  But if he deserts me, Nell, at this moment--if he deserts me now, when I should, with his assistance, be recompensed for all the time and money I have lost, and all the agony of mind I have undergone, which makes me what you see, I am ruined, and--worse, far worse than that--have ruined thee, for whom I ventured all.  If we are beggars--!", 'What if we are? Let us be beggars, and be happy.', 'Beggars--and happy! Poor child!', 'Dear grandfather, I am not a child in that I think, but even if I am, oh hear me pray that we may beg, or work in open roads or fields, to earn a scanty living, rather than live as we do now.', 'Nelly!', 'Yes, yes, rather than live as we do now, If you are sorrowful, let me know why and be sorrowful too; if you waste away and are paler and weaker every day, let me be your nurse and try to comfort you.  If you are poor, let us be poor together; but let me be with you, do let me be with you; do not let me see such change and not know why, or I shall break my heart and die.  Dear grandfather, let us leave this sad place to-morrow, and beg our way from door to door.', 'Let us be beggars, I have no fear but we shall have enough, I am sure we shall.  Let us walk through country places, and sleep in fields and under trees, and never think of money again, or anything that can make you sad, but rest at nights, and have the sun and wind upon our faces in the day, and thank God together!  Let us never set foot in dark rooms or melancholy houses, any more, but wander up and down wherever we like to go; and when you are tired, you shall stop to rest in the pleasantest place that we can find, and I will go and beg for both.', 'Through the door, I', 'Ah! what a nice kiss that was--just upon the rosy part.  What a capital kiss!', 'Such a fresh, blooming, modest little bud, neighbour, such a chubby, rosy, cosy, little Nell!', 'She  said Quilp, speaking very slowly, and feigning to be quite absorbed in the subject,  re nervous!  Why neighbour, what  continued the dwarf dismounting from the chair and sitting down in it, with a careful slowness of gesture very different from the rapidity with which he had sprung up unheard, ', 'I believe it is, There', 'Once, and once for all, have you brought me any money?', 'No!', 'Then, the child and I are lost!', 'Neighbour, let me be plain with you, and play a fairer game than when you held all the cards, and I saw but the backs and nothing more.  You have no secret from me now.', 'You are surprised, Well, perhaps that', 'Aye! say it, if you will.', 'To the gaming-table, your nightly haunt.  This was the precious scheme to make your fortune, was it; this was the secret certain source of wealth in which I was to have sunk my money (if I had been the fool you took me for); this was your inexhaustible mine of gold, your El Dorado, eh?', 'Yes, it was. It is.  It will be, till I die.', 'That I should have been blinded, by a mere shallow gambler!', 'I am no gambler, I call Heaven to witness that I never played for gain of mine, or love of play; that at every piece I staked, I whispered to myself that orphan', 'When did you first begin this mad career?', 'When did I first begin? When was it, that I first began?  When should it be, but when I began to think how little I had saved, how long a time it took to save at all, how short a time I might have at my age to live, and how she would be left to the rough mercies of the world, with barely enough to keep her from the sorrows that wait on poverty; then it was that I began to think about it.', 'After you first came to me to get your precious grandson packed off to sea?', 'Shortly after that, I thought of it a long time, and had it in my sleep for months.  Then I began.  I found no pleasure in it, I expected none.  What has it ever brought me but anxious days and sleepless nights; but loss of health and peace of mind, and gain of feebleness and sorrow!', 'You lost what money you had laid by, first, and then came to me. While I thought you were making your fortune (as you said you were) you were making yourself a beggar, eh?  Dear me!  And so it comes to pass that I hold every security you could scrape together, and a bill of sale upon the--upon the stock and property, But did you never win?', 'Never! Never won back my loss!', 'I thought, that if a man played long enough he was sure to win at last, or, at the worst, not to come off a loser.', 'And so he is, so he is; I have felt that from the first, I have always known it, I', 'See, Quilp, good tender-hearted Quilp, s arm, ', 'The last advance was seventy, and it went in one night.', 'I know it did, but that was the very worst fortune of all, and the time had not come then.  Quilp, consider, consider, that orphan child!  If I were alone, I could die with gladness--perhaps even anticipate that doom which is dealt out so unequally: coming, as it does, on the proud and happy in their strength, and shunning the needy and afflicted, and all who court it in their despair--but what I have done, has been for her.  Help me for her sake I implore you; not for mine; for hers!', 'I ve got an appointment in the city, or I should have been very glad to have spent half an hour with you while you composed yourself, very glad.', 'Nay, Quilp, good Quilp, you and I have talked together, more than once, of her poor mother', 'you and I have talked together, more than once, of her poor mother', 'I couldn  said Quilp with unusual politeness, ', 'All done to save money for tempting fortune, and to make her triumph greater,', 'Yes, yes, I understand that now, but I was going to say, I was so deceived by that, your miserly way, the reputation you had among those who knew you of being rich, and your repeated assurances that you would make of my advances treble and quadruple the interest you paid me, that I t unexpectedly become acquainted with your secret way of life.', 'Who is it, that, notwithstanding all my caution, told you?  Come.  Let me know the name--the person.', 'It was Kit, it must have been the boy; he played the spy, and you tampered with him?', 'How came you to think of him? Yes, it was Kit.  Poor Kit!', 'Poor Kit! I think it was Kit who said I was an uglier dwarf than could be seen anywhere for a penny, wasn', 'Bless us! who s you, Kit!', 'Yes, mother, it', 'Why, how tired you look, my dear!', 'Old master an  said Kit;  t been at the window at all.', 'Ah, mother! what a one you are!  There an', 'I hope there are many a great deal better, Kit, and that there are, or ought to be, accordin', 'and that there are, or ought to be, accordin', 'Much he knows about it, Wait till he ll ask him what clock and trust him for being right to half a second.', 'Well, your beer', 'I see, my love to you, mother.  And the parson t bear him any malice, not I!', 'Did you tell me, just now, that your master hadn', 'Yes, worse luck!', 'You should say better luck, I think, because Miss Nelly won', 'Ah! I forgot that.  I said worse luck, because I clock, and seen nothing of her.', 'I wonder what she  cried his mother, stopping in her work and looking round,  re ever so tired, till such time as you think she', 'Never mind what she  replied Kit, with something like a blush on his uncouth face;  ll never know nothing, and consequently, she', 'I know what some people would say, Kit--', 'Nonsense,', 'No, but they would indeed.  Some people would say that you', 'Speaking seriously though, Kit, for of course I was only in joke just now, it m sure she would be very grateful to you and feel it very much.  It t wonder that the old gentleman wants to keep it from you.', 'He don s cruel, bless you, and don t do it--I do consider, mother, that he wouldn t. I know him better than that.', 'Then what does he do it for, and why does he keep it so close from you?', 'That I don  returned her son.   t tried to keep it so close though, I should never have found it out, for it was his getting me away at night and sending me off so much earlier than he used to, that first made me curious to know what was going on.  Hark! what', 'It', 'It  said Kit, standing up to listen,  t have gone out after I left, and the house caught fire, mother!', 'and coming very fast too.  He can', 'Miss Nelly!  What is the matter!', 'I must not stay a moment, grandfather has been taken very ill.  I found him in a fit upon the floor--', 'I --said Kit, seizing his brimless hat.   ll be there directly, I', 'No, no, there is one there, you', 'What!', 'Never again, Don t know. Pray don t be sorry, pray don', 'He complains and raves of you, I don s nothing very bad.', 'I done!', 'He cried that you  returned the child with tearful eyes; ', 'I have brought his money for the week, and--and--a little more, for he was always good and kind to me.  I hope he will be sorry and do well somewhere else and not take this to heart too much.  It grieves me very much to part with him like this, but there is no help.  It must be done.  Good night!', 'Smoke away, you dog, fill your pipe again and smoke it fast, down to the last whiff, or I', 'Is it good, Brass, is it nice, is it fragrant, do you feel like the Grand Turk?', 'This is the way to keep off fever, this is the way to keep off every calamity of life!  We', 'Shall we stop here long, Mr Quilp?', 'We must stop, I suppose, till the old gentleman up stairs is dead,', 'He he he! oh! very good!', 'Smoke away! Never stop!  You can talk as you smoke. Don', 'He he he! But if he should get better, Mr Quilp?', 'Then we shall stop till he does, and no longer,', 'How kind it is of you, Sir, to wait till then! Some people, Sir, would have sold or removed the goods--oh dear, the very instant the law allowed ', 'Some people would have spared themselves the jabbering of such a parrot as you,', 'He he he! You have such spirits!', 'Here  down.', 'The what, you dog?', 'The gal, Are you deaf?', 'Oh! you and I will have such a settling presently; there', 'He', 'What a pretty little Nell!', 'Oh beautiful, sir, beautiful indeed, Quite charming.', 'Has she come to sit upon Quilp  said the dwarf, in what he meant to be a soothing tone, ', 'What a remarkable pleasant way he has with children! upon my word it', 'I  faltered Nell.   t come down here any more.', 'And a very nice little room it is! Quite a bower!  You re not going to use it; you re not coming back, Nelly?', 'No, never again!  Never again.', 'She  said Quilp, looking after her.   s a pity.  The bedstead is much about my size.  I think I shall make it MY little room.', 'Miss Nell!', 'Yes, what do you want?', 'I have wanted to say a word to you, for a long time, but the people below have driven me away and wouldn t believe--I hope you don', 'but the people below have driven me away and wouldn t believe--I hope you don', 'I must believe it, Or why would grandfather have been so angry with you?', 'I don  replied Kit.   m sure I never deserved it from him, no, nor from you.  I can say that, with a true and honest heart, any way.  And then to be driven from the door, when I only came to ask how old master was--!', 'They never told me that, I didn t have had them do it for the world.', 'Thank  returned Kit,  s comfortable to hear you say that. I said I never would believe that it was your doing.', 'That was right!', 'Miss Nell, there are new masters down stairs.  It', 'It is indeed,', 'And so it will be for him when he gets better,', '--If he ever does,', 'Oh, he ll do that, I t be cast down, Miss Nell.  Now don', 'He  said the boy anxiously,  t give way to low spirits and turn ill yourself, which would make him worse and throw him back, just as he was recovering.  When he does, say a good word--say a kind word for me, Miss Nell!', 'They tell me I must not even mention your name to him for a long, long time, I dare not; and even if I might, what good would a kind word do you, Kit?  We shall be very poor.  We shall scarcely have bread to eat.', 'It  said the boy,  t for the sake of food and wages that I t think that I', 'No, it  said Kit hesitating,  s something very different from that.  I haven d been a faithful servant to him, doing the best I could, and never meaning harm, perhaps he mightn', 'Perhaps he mightn  cried Kit with sudden boldness.   s better than this with all these people here; and why not come there, till he', 'You think, that it s very clean.  Perhaps you think it would be noisy, but there t be afraid of the children; the baby hardly ever cries, and the other one is very good--besides, I em.  They wouldn m sure.  Do try, Miss Nell, do try.  The little front room up stairs is very pleasant.  You can see a piece of the church-clock, through the chimneys, and almost tell the time; mother says it would be just the thing for you, and so it would, and you t mean money, bless you; you ll try him.  Do try to make old master come, and ask him first what I have done.  Will you only promise that, Miss Nell?', 'I  said the dwarf, sitting down opposite him.   re quite strong now?', 'Yes, yes.', 'I don  said the dwarf, raising his voice, for the old man but, as soon as you can arrange your future proceedings, the better.', 'Surely, The better for all parties.', 'You see, the goods being once removed, this house would be uncomfortable; uninhabitable in fact.', 'You say true, Poor Nell too, what would she do?', 'Exactly, that', 'I will, certainly, We shall not stop here.', 'So I supposed, I have sold the things.  They have not yielded quite as much as they might have done, but pretty well--pretty well.  To-day s no hurry--shall we say this afternoon?', 'Say Friday morning,', 'Very good, So be it--with the understanding that I can', 'Good, I shall remember it.', 'Forgive you--what? Oh grandfather, what should I forgive?', 'Oh grandfather, what should I forgive?', 'All that is past, all that has come upon thee, Nell, all that was done in that uneasy dream,', 'Do not talk so, Pray do not.  Let us speak of something else.', 'Yes, yes, we will, And it shall be of what we talked of long ago--many months--months is it, or weeks, or days?  which is it Nell?', 'I do not understand you,', 'It has come back upon me to-day, it has all come back since we have been sitting here.  I bless thee for it, Nell!', 'For what, dear grandfather?', 'For what you said when we were first made beggars, Nell.  Let us speak softly.  Hush!  for if they knew our purpose down stairs, they would cry that I was mad and take thee from me.  We will not stop here another day.  We will go far away from here.', 'Yes, let us go, Let us begone from this place, and never turn back or think of it again.  Let us wander barefoot through the world, rather than linger here.', 'We will, we will travel afoot through the fields and woods, and by the side of rivers, and trust ourselves to God in the places where He dwells.  It is far better to lie down at night beneath an open sky like that yonder--see how bright it is--than to rest in close rooms which are always full of care and weary dreams. Thou and I together, Nell, may be cheerful and happy yet, and learn to forget this time, as if it had never been.', 'We will be happy, We never can be here.', 'No, we never can again--never again--that  rejoined the old man.   ll turn our faces from this scene of sorrow, and be as free and happy as the birds.', 'Which way?', 'The key, the door-key--that ye know anything of it?', 'How should I know anything of it, sir?', 'How should you? You t you?  Ugh, you idiot!', 'There  said Mr Swiveller, by turns advancing and retreating in a threatening attitude,  t say no, if you', 'I thought it was somebody else, why didn', 'why didn', 'Why didn  returned Dick, ', 'It was you that--that knocked, was it?', 'Yes, I am the man, That lady had begun when I came, but she knocked too soft, so I relieved her.', 'Humph! I thought it was your fault!  And you, sir--don d beat the door down?', 'Damme! that', 'You came for some purpose, I suppose, What is it you want?', 'I want to know how the old gentleman is, and to hear from Nell herself, with whom I should like to have a little talk.  I m the friend of one of the family, and that', 'You  said the dwarf.   am.', 'Now, Mrs Quilp, go you up stairs, if you please, to Nelly s wanted.', 'You seem to make yourself at home here,', 'I AM at home, young gentleman,', 'Empty, you fool!', 'I give you my word, Quilp, that I have been into every room and there', 'And that, explains the mystery of the key!', 'explains the mystery of the key!', 'It  he said, glancing at Swiveller,  ll write to me no doubt, or he s what he s very fond of me. Pretty Nell!', 'For indeed, we knew that they d go so early, or so quietly.  But they have their reasons, they have their reasons.', 'Where in the devil', 'And what, what do you mean by moving the goods?', 'That I have bought   rejoined Quilp.  ', 'Has the sly old fox made his fortune then, and gone to live in a tranquil cot in a pleasant spot with a distant view of the changing sea?', 'Keeping his place of retirement very close, that he may not be visited too often by affectionate grandsons and their devoted friends, eh? I say nothing, but is that your meaning?', 'Well, I suppose it', 'Not the least in the world,', 'You', 'And say, say, sir, that I was wafted here upon the pinions of concord; that I came to remove, with the rake of friendship, the seeds of mutual violence and heart-burning, and to sow in their place, the germs of social harmony.  Will you have the goodness to charge yourself with that commission, Sir?', 'Certainly!', 'Will you be kind enough to add to it, Sir, that that is my address, and that I am to be found at home every morning.  Two distinct knocks, sir, will produce the slavey at any time.  My particular friends, Sir, are accustomed to sneeze when the door is opened, to give her to understand that they ARE my friends and have no interested motives in asking if I', 'Oh! by all means,', 'By a slight and not unnatural mistake, sir, I had handed you the pass-ticket of a select convivial circle called the Glorious Apollers of which I have the honour to be Perpetual Grand.  That is the proper document, Sir.  Good morning.', 'Come here, you sir, Well, so your old master and young mistress have gone?', 'Where?', 'Do you mean to say you don  answered Quilp sharply. ', 'Where have they gone, eh?', 'I don', 'Come, let t know they went away by stealth, as soon as it was light this morning?', 'No,', 'You don  cried Quilp.   t I know that you were hanging about the house the other night, like a thief, eh?  Weren', 'No,', 'You were not? What were you told then; what were you talking about?', 'Oh! Then, I think they', 'Do you think they will?', 'Aye, I think they will, Now, when they do, let me know; d ll give you something.  I want to do  t do ', 'Wring its neck,', 'Oh no, don  said Kit, stepping forward.  ', 'Oh yes, I dare say, Come!  You let the cage alone, and let me wring its neck will you?  He said I was to do it. You let the cage alone will you.', 'Give it here, give it to me, you dogs, Fight for it, you dogs, or I', 'Goodness gracious, Kit, what is the matter, what have you been doing?', 'Never you mind, mother, I t you be afraid for me. I  for a bird and won him, that', 'You have been fighting for a bird!', 'Ah!  Fightin  replied Kit,  s bird, mother, that they was agoin t wring his neck and me by, no, no. It wouldn t do at all.  Ha ha ha!', 'Let me see, I think I s more light and cheerful, and he can see the sky there, if he looks up very much.  He', 'And now, mother, before I rest any more, I', 'I beg your pardon, sir, I', 'I  returned the old gentleman. ', 'If you like to come on after us, you may have the job.', 'Will you go on, sir, or are we to wait here for you till it', 'Oh you naughty Whisker, Fie upon you!  I', 'Witherden--Notary.', 'I brought it in honour of the occasion, Sir,', 'Ah! an occasion indeed, ma am, honour to me, I have had many a gentleman articled to me, ma am, others are in the habit of calling upon me to this day and saying, "Mr Witherden, some of the pleasantest hours I ever spent in my life were spent in this office--were spent, Sir, upon this very stool"; but there was never one among the number, ma', 'Oh dear! How happy you do make us when you tell us that, to be sure!', 'I tell you, ma  said Mr Witherden,  am.  The mountainous Alps on the one hand, or a humming-bird on the other, is nothing, in point of workmanship, to an honest man--or woman--or woman.', 'Anything that Mr Witherden can say of me, I can say, with interest, of him, I am sure.', 'It  said the Notary, ', 'Marrying as his mother and I did, late in life, sir, after waiting for a great many years, until we were well enough off--coming together when we were no longer young, and then being blessed with one child who has always been dutiful and affectionate--why, it', 'Of course it is, I have no doubt of it, It s a weakness.  Chuckster, bring in Mr Abel', 'You see, Mr Witherden, that Abel has not been brought up like the run of young men.  He has always had a pleasure in our society, and always been with us.  Abel has never been absent from us, for a day; has he, my dear?', 'Never, my dear, except when he went to Margate one Saturday with Mr Tomkinley that had been a teacher at that school he went to, and came back upon the Monday; but he was very ill after that, you remember, my dear; it was quite a dissipation.', 'He was not used to it, you know, and he couldn s the truth.  Besides he had no comfort in being there without us, and had nobody to talk to or enjoy himself with.', 'That was it, you know, I was quite abroad, mother, quite desolate, and to think that the sea was between us--oh, I never shall forget what I felt when I first thought that the sea was between us!', 'Very natural under the circumstances, Mr Abel am, and his father t be alarmed, ma', 'There, I re here, my lad, to work it out.', 'Thank you, Sir, I', 'daily bread', 'Dear grandfather, only that this place is prettier and a great deal better than the real one, if that in the book is like it, I feel as if we were both Christian, and laid down on this grass all the cares and troubles we brought with us; never to take them up again.', 'No--never to return--never to return Thou and I are free of it now, Nell.  They shall never lure us back.', 'Are you tired? are you sure you don', 'I shall never feel ill again, now that we are once away, Let us be stirring, Nell.  We must be further away--a long, long way further.  We are too near to stop, and be at rest.  Come!', 'I can do nothing for myself, my darling, I don s gone.  Don lt not leave me.  I loved thee all the while, indeed I did.  If I lose thee too, my dear, I must die!', 'God save you, master, are you travelling far?', 'are you travelling far?', 'Yes, Sir, a long way', 'From London?', 'Sit thee down, master, in the elbow chair, Take a pinch out o t take much myself, for it comes dear, but I find it wakes me up sometimes, and ye d lived, but they listed him for a so d be buried near the sun-dial he used to climb upon when he was a baby, did my poor boy, and his words come true--you can see the place with your own eyes; we', 'How far is it to any town or village?', 'A matter of good five mile, my dear, but you', 'Yes, yes, Nell, Further on, further on, darling, further away if we walk till midnight.', 'Further on, further on, darling, further away if we walk till midnight.', 'There  said the man,  s travellers  Harrer.  Excuse me, but you do seem a little tired, and unless you', 'Yes, yes, we are, Further away, dear Nell, pray further away.', 'We must go on, indeed, We thank you very much, but we cannot stop so soon.  I', 'We thank you very much, but we cannot stop so soon.  I', 'God bless you!', 'Didn', 'Yes, sir,', 'Ah!  They asked me to look out for you, I', 'Why do you come here to do this?', 'Why you see, we t do to let ', 'No! why not, eh? why not?', 'Because it would destroy all the delusion, and take away all the interest, wouldn  replied the little man.   penny for the Lord Chancellor if you know', 'Good! Are you going to show ', 'That is the intention, governor, and unless I ve lost through your coming upon us.  Cheer up, Tommy, it can', 'Ah! it  rejoined his companion.   lar drama in the fairs, you believed in everything--except ghosts.  But now you', 'Never mind, I know better now, and p m sorry for it.', 'Look here; here s clothes falling to pieces again. You haven', 'I have a needle, Sir, in my basket, and thread too.  Will you let me try to mend it for you?  I think I could do it neater than you could.', 'N--no further to-night, I think,', 'If you  the man remarked,  s it.  The long, low, white house there.  It', 'These two gentlemen have ordered supper in an hour  she said, taking her into the bar;  ll do you good, for I ve gone through to-day.  Now, don ve drank that, he shall have some too.', 'Were you his mother?', 'I was his wife, my dear.', 'You wonder to hear me say that, You t change us more than life, my dear.', 'Do you come here often?', 'I sit here very often in the summer time, I used to come here once to cry and mourn, but that was a weary while ago, bless God!', 'I pluck the daisies as they grow, and take them home, I like no flowers so well as these, and haven s a long time, and I', 'And where are you going to-day?', 'Indeed I hardly know--we have not determined yet,', 'We  said the little man.   s your way and you like to have us for company, let us travel together.  If you prefer going alone, only say the word and you t trouble you.', 'We  said the old man.  ', 'Objection! Now be gracious for once, Tommy, and say that you', 'Trotters, you', 'you', 'Why what harm can it do?', 'No harm at all in this particular case, perhaps, but the principle re too free I tell you.', 'but the principle re too free I tell you.', 'Well, are they to go with us or not?', 'Yes, they are, but you might have made a favour of it, mightn', 'Trotters,', 'It s lot, an', 'Yes,', 'Come on then, Let', 'Bound for the races, I see, So are we.  How are you, Short?', 'So are we.  How are you, Short?', 'Practice?', 'No, It comes either to walkin em or carryin em, and they like walkin em best.  It ?  We go the nighest.', 'Why, the fact is, that we are going the longest way, because then we could stop for the night, a mile and a half on.  But three or four mile gained to-night is so many saved to-morrow, and if you keep on, I think our best way is to do the same.', 'Where', 'Here he is, and he ll go on to-night.  That', 'Well, don  urged Short.  ', 'Rough or smooth, rough or smooth, I won', 'All alone?', 'All alone as yet, but we shall have more company to-night I expect.  Here one of you boys, carry that show into the barn.  Make haste in out of the wet, Tom; when it came on to rain I told  s a glorious blaze in the kitchen, I can tell you.', 'It  said the landlord smacking his lips,   smacking them again,   smacking them once more,   smacking them for the fourth time, ', 'and steak, and peas, cauliflowers, new potatoes, and sparrow-grass, all working up together in one delicious gravy.', 'At what time will it be ready?', 'It  said the landlord looking up to the clock--and the very clock had a colour in its fat white face, and looked a clock for jolly Sandboys to consult-- ll be done to a turn at twenty-two minutes before eleven.', 'Then, fetch me a pint of warm ale, and don', 'Who are they?', 'Don', 'Not I, They', 'They  said Short.   s plain that the old man an', 'If you haven  growled Mr Codlin, glancing at the clock,  d better let us fix our minds upon the supper, and not disturb us.', 'Hear me out, won  retorted his friend.   s very plain to me, besides, that they t tell me that that handsome child has been in the habit of prowling about as she', 'Well, who DOES tell you she has? can em?', 'I wish somebody would give you your supper, for there ve got it.  Have you seen how anxious the old man is to get on--always wanting to be furder away--furder away. Have you seen that?', 'Ah! what then?', 'This, then, He has given his friends the slip.  Mind what I say--he has given his friends the slip, and persuaded this delicate young creetur all along of her fondness for him to be his guide and travelling companion--where to, he knows no more than the man in the moon.  Now I', 'YOU  cried Mr Codlin, glancing at the clock again and pulling his hair with both hands in a kind of frenzy, but whether occasioned by his companion Here', 'I, am not a-going to stand it.  I am not a-going to see this fair young child a falling into bad hands, and getting among people that she em, and restoring ', 'Short, it ve said.  If there is, and there should be a reward, Short, remember that we', 'Your people don  said Short, pointing to the dresses of the dogs.  ', 'No, no, it ve been playing a little on the road to-day, and we come out with a new wardrobe at the races, so I didn', 'I  said Jerry, putting his hand into the capacious pocket of his coat, and diving into one corner as if he were feeling for a small orange or an apple or some such article, ', 'Ah! let', 'Here he is, He was once a Toby of yours, warn', 'He was once a Toby of yours, warn', 'No, my dear, no, not an atom from anybody  said Jerry, pointing out the old leader of the troop, and speaking in a terrible voice, ', 'You must be more careful, Sir, Come here. Now, Sir, you play away at that, while we have supper, and leave off if you dare.', 'Now, gentlemen, The dog whose name t called, keep quiet.  Carlo!', 'How', 'Rather weak upon his legs, I begin to be afraid he', 'That', 'Aye!  Bad indeed, Once get a giant shaky on his legs, and the public care no more about him than they do for a dead cabbage stalk.', 'What becomes of old giants?', 'They', 'The maintaining of  t be shown, eh?', 'It em go upon the parish or about the streets, Once make a giant common and giants will never draw again.  Look at wooden legs.  If there was only one man with a wooden leg what a property he', 'So he would! That', 'Instead of which, if you was to advertise Shakspeare played entirely by wooden legs, it t draw a sixpence.', 'I don', 'This shows, you see, this shows the policy of keeping the used-up giants still in the carawans, where they get food and lodging for nothing, all their lives, and in general very glad they are to stop there.  There was one giant--a black   said Mr Vuffin, looking solemnly round, ', 'I know you do, Jerry, I know you remember it, Jerry, and the universal opinion was, that it served him right.  Why, I remember the time when old Maunders as had three-and-twenty wans--I remember the time when old Maunders had in his cottage in Spa Fields in the winter time, when the season was over, eight male and female dwarfs setting down to dinner every day, who was waited on by eight old giants in green coats, red smalls, blue cotton stockings, and high-lows: and there was one dwarf as had grown elderly and wicious who whenever his giant wasn s a fact, for Maunders told it me himself.', 'What about the dwarfs when they get old?', 'The older a dwarf is, the better worth he is, a grey-headed dwarf, well wrinkled, is beyond all suspicion.  But a giant weak in the legs and not standing upright!--keep him in the carawan, but never show him, never show him, for any persuasion that can be offered.', 'What is the matter?', 'Nothing  returned her visitor.   m your friend.  Perhaps you haven s me that', 'Not who?', 'Short, my dear.  I tell you what, for all his having a kind of way with him that you m the real, open-hearted man.  I mayn', 'Short  resumed the misanthrope,  t.', 'Take my advice, don t offer to leave us--not on any account--but always stick to me and say that I', 'Say so where--and when?', 'O, nowhere in particular, I t think what an interest I have in you. Why didn m the best adviser that ever was, and so interested in you--so much more interested than Short.  I think they t tell Short, you know, that we s the friend, not Short.  Short', 'Yes,', 'It --a voice called through the keyhole.   t be worth a penny.  You ll call you.', 'Grandfather, don t seem as if I spoke of anything but what I am about.  What was that you told me before we left the old house?  That if they knew what we were going to do, they would say that you were mad, and part us?', 'I know that was what you told me.  You needn re only quiet now, we shall do so, easily.', 'How? Dear Nelly, how?  They will shut me up in a stone room, dark and cold, and chain me up to the wall, Nell--flog me with whips, and never let me see thee more!', 'You  said the child.   t look at them, but me.  I shall find a time when we can steal away.  When I do, mind you come with me, and do not stop or speak a word.  Hush!  That', 'Halloa! what are you up to, my dear? Codlin', 'Making some nosegays, I am going to try and sell some, these three days of the races.  Will you have one--as a present I mean?', 'I think they must certainly come to-morrow, eh mother? They have been gone a week.  They surely couldn', 'For the matter of that, you speak true and sensible enough, as you always do, mother.  Still, I do consider that a week is quite long enough for  t you say so?', 'Quite long enough, Kit, longer than enough, but they may not come back for all that.', 'Then what do you think, mother, has become of  t think they', 'Not gone for sailors, certainly, But I can', 'But I can', 'I say, don', 'I am afraid they have, and that  she said.   s the talk of all the neighbours, and there are some even that know of their having been seen on board ship, and can tell you the name of the place they s a very hard one.', 'I don  said Kit.  ', 'They may be wrong of course, I can t think it re in the right, for the talk is that the old gentleman had put by a little money that nobody knew of, not even that ugly little man you talk to me about--what t be taken from them, and they will never be disturbed.  That don', 'Now, Sir, will you ha', 'Oh dear, such a naughty Whisker! After being so good too, and coming along so well!  I am quite ashamed of him.  I don t.', 'Why, bless me, the lad is here!  My dear, do you see?', 'I said I  said Kit, patting Whisker I hope you s a very nice little pony.', 'My dear, This is an uncommon lad; a good lad, I', 'I  rejoined the old lady.  ', 'Well, boy, you came to work out that shilling;--not to get another, hey?', 'No indeed, sir, I never thought of such a thing.', 'Father alive?', 'Dead, sir.', 'Mother?', 'Yes, sir.', 'Married again--eh?', 'Now, I am not going to give you anything--', 'Thank you, sir,', '--But, perhaps I may want to know something more about you, so tell me where you live, and I', 'We are here before you, you see, Christopher,', 'Yes, sir,', 'The gentleman  said she, in reply to this mute interrogation, ', '--That we wanted a good lad in our house, and that perhaps we might think of it, if we found everything as we would wish it to be.', 'You see, my good woman, s mother,  s necessary to be very careful and particular in such a matter as this, for we', 'don  for proof of which statements reference was made to Mrs Green, lodger, at the cheesemonger s mother certain remarkable circumstances which had attended the birth of each, related certain other remarkable circumstances which had attended the birth of her own son, Mr Abel, from which it appeared that both Kit', 'Well, mother, I think my fortune', 'I should think it was indeed, Kit, Six pound a year!  Only think!', 'Ah! There', 'There', 'Please God we', 'Hem! What', 'Who said he was to have six pound a year? Did the old man say it, or did little Nell say it?  And what', 'Don  said Quilp, after a pause.   t eat babies; I don em.  It will be as well to stop that young screamer though, in case I should be tempted to do him a mischief.  Holloa, sir!  Will you be quiet?', 'Mind you don  said Quilp, looking sternly at him,  ll make faces at you and throw you into fits, I will.  Now you sir, why haven', 'What should I come for? I hadn', 'Here, mistress, When did his old master come or send here last? Is he here now?  If not, where', 'He has not been here at all, I wish we knew where they have gone, for it would make my son a good deal easier in his mind, and me too.  If you d have known, and so I told him only this very day.', 'Humph! That', 'If the gentleman comes to ask the same question, I can', 'Yes, that was the object of the present expedition.  I fancied it possible--but let us go ring fancy ll begin it.', 'You seem disappointed,', 'A baffler, Sir, a baffler, that  returned Dick.   s altar. That', 'I am disappointed myself, out of mere friendly feeling for them; but you have real reasons, private reasons I have no doubt, for your disappointment, and therefore it comes heavier than mine.', 'Why, of course it does,', 'Upon my word, I m rather cast down myself.  As we are companions in adversity, shall we be companions in the surest way of forgetting it?  If you had no particular business, now, to lead you in another direction, there is a house by the water-side where they have some of the noblest Schiedam--reputed to be smuggled, but that s a little summer-house overlooking the river, where we might take a glass of this delicious liquor with a whiff of the best tobacco--it', 'Is it good? is it strong and fiery?  Does it make you wink, and choke, and your eyes water, and your breath come short--does it?', 'Does it? why, man, you don', 'No! Not drink it!  Look here.  And here.  And here again.  Not drink it!', 'Give us a toast! a woman, a beauty.  Let', 'If you want a name, here', 'Sophy Wackles, Miss Sophy Wackles that is--Mrs Richard Swiveller that shall be--that shall be--ha ha ha!', 'Ah! you might have said that a few weeks ago, but it won', 'Poison Cheggs, cut Cheggs  rejoined Quilp.   t hear of Cheggs.  Her name is Swiveller or nothing.  I s, and her mother', 'Well, you', 'Stop! That s the thing.  It can be brought about, it shall be brought about.  There', 'What! do you think there', 'A chance! a certainty!  Sophy Wackles may become a Cheggs or anything else she likes, but not a Swiveller.  Oh you lucky dog!  He re a made man.  I see in you now nothing but Nelly ll help you.  It shall be done.  Mind my words, it shall be done.', 'But how?', 'There  rejoined the dwarf,  ll sit down and talk it over again all the way through.  Fill your glass while I', 'Here  he cried,  other day, was it?  It was his friend and fellow-plotter, Mr Trent, that once made eyes at Mrs Quilp, and leered and looked, was it?  After labouring for two or three years in their precious scheme, to find that they ll be the first man, when the knot em what they ve helped  em what a capital friend I was, and how I helped them to the heiress.  Ha ha ha!', 'Why don t you come and tear me to pieces, you coward? You re afraid, you know you are.', 'I don s hardly a chance of his really losing it, but carriers are under great temptation to pretend they lose things, no doubt,', 'No doubt about it, upon my word, mother, I don m afraid.', 'We can  said his mother;  t to be tempted.', '_You_ know you must keep up your spirits, mother, and not be lonesome because I t take little Jacob to the play, and let him know what oysters means.', 'I hope plays mayn m a', 'I know who has been putting that in your head, that t take to going there regularly, for if I was to see your good-humoured face that has always made home cheerful, turned into a grievous one, and the baby trained to look grievous too, and to call itself a young sinner (bless its heart) and a child of the devil (which is calling its dead father names); if I was to see this, and see little Jacob looking grievous likewise, I should so take it to heart that I', 'Oh, Kit, don', 'I would, indeed, mother, and unless you want to make me feel very wretched and uncomfortable, you d more than half a mind to pull off last week.  Can you suppose there m made, which calls upon me to be a snivelling, solemn, whispering chap, sneaking about as if I couldn t I see every reason why I shouldn t that as nat t that as nat s bleating, or a pig s neighing, or a bird t it, mother?', 'I suppose you', 'I ve rung a good many times perhaps, but we couldn ve been catching the pony.', 'Left an infant by my parents, at an early age, cast upon the world in my tenderest period, and thrown upon the mercies of a deluding dwarf, who can wonder at my weakness!  Here  said Mr Swiveller raising his voice to a high pitch, and looking sleepily round, ', 'Then, let me be a father to you.', 'You have deceived an orphan, Sir,', 'I!  I', 'You my father, Sir! Being all right myself, Sir, I request to be left alone--instantly, Sir.', 'What a funny fellow you are!', 'Go, Sir, Go, deceiver, go, some day, Sir, p aps you s dream to know, the grief of orphans forsaken.  Will you go, Sir?', 'Go, deceiver, go, some day, Sir, p aps you s dream to know, the grief of orphans forsaken.  Will you go, Sir?', 'I  said Quilp to him, at parting,  m his friend though I fear he a little distrusts me (I don ve both of you made your fortunes--in perspective.', 'That  returned Dick.  ', 'But they look smaller than they really are, on that account, You', 'D', 'Aye, I do; and I am certain of what I say, that  returned the dwarf.   t I be?', 'There t, certainly, and perhaps there are a great many why you should--at least there would be nothing strange in your wanting to be my friend, if you were a choice spirit, but then you know you', 'I not a choice spirit?', 'Devil a bit, sir, A man of your appearance couldn re any spirit at all, sir, you  added Dick, smiting himself on the breast, ', 'I don  said the penitent Richard;  t have kept anything from him.  He s what he is.', 'Why, let me see, It must be a matter of nearly two years since we were first acquainted.', 'Nearer three, I think,', 'Nearer three! How fast time flies.  Does it seem as long as that to you, Mrs Quilp?', 'Yes, I think it seems full three years, Quilp,', 'Oh indeed, ma  thought Quilp,  am.', 'It seems to me but yesterday that you went out to Demerara in the Mary Anne, but yesterday, I declare.  Well, I like a little wildness.  I was wild myself once.', 'I thought you  said Quilp setting down his glass.  ', 'I always will say, that when a rich relation having two young people--sisters or brothers, or brother and sister--dependent on him, attaches himself exclusively to one, and casts off the other, he does wrong.', 'It  said Quilp,  s a scoundrel," said he. "Granting that," said I (for the sake of argument of course), "a great many young noblemen and gentlemen are scoundrels too!" But he wouldn', 't be convinced.', 'I wonder at that, Mr Quilp,', 'Well, so did I at the time, but he was always obstinate.  He was in a manner a friend of mine, but he was always obstinate and wrong-headed.  Little Nell is a nice girl, a charming girl, but you re her brother after all; as you told him the last time you met, he can', 'He would if he could, confound him for that and all other kindnesses, But nothing can come of this subject now, and let us have done with it in the Devil', 'Agreed, agreed on my part readily.  Why have I alluded to it?  Just to show you, Frederick, that I have always stood your friend.  You little knew who was your friend, and who your foe; now did you?  You thought I was against you, and so there has been a coolness between us; but it was all on your side, entirely on your side.  Let', 'It  said Quilp, making a grimace towards the slumbering Dick.  ', 'You have some end of your own to answer, of course,', 'Of course I have, dear Fred, It', 'Throw it into mine then,', 'It  rejoined Quilp, stretching out his clenched hand and opening it as if he had let some weight fall out.   s in the scale from this time, and turns it, Fred.  Mind that.', 'Where have they gone?', 'He has feigned it often enough to me, of late,', 'Oh! and to me too! Which is more extraordinary, as I know how rich he really is.', 'I suppose you should,', 'I think I should indeed,', 'We are quite safe now, and have nothing to fear indeed, dear grandfather,', 'Nothing to fear! Nothing to fear if they took me from thee!  Nothing to fear if they parted us!  Nobody is true to me.  No, not one.  Not even Nell!', 'Oh! do not say that, for if ever anybody was true at heart, and earnest, I am.  I am sure you know I am.', 'Then how, how can you bear to think that we are safe, when they are searching for me everywhere, and may come here, and steal upon us, even while we', 'Because I  said the child.  ', 'True, too, What noise was that?', 'A bird, flying into the wood, and leading the way for us to follow. s the bird--the same bird--now he flies to another tree, and stays to sing.  Come!', 'Speak to him, dear,', 'I am almost afraid to disturb him, He does not seem to see us.  Perhaps if we wait a little, he may look this way.', 'If you could direct us anywhere, sir, we should take it very kindly.', 'You have been walking a long way,', 'A long way, Sir,', 'You  he said, laying his hand gently on her head.  ', 'Aye, Sir, and the stay and comfort of my life.', 'Come in,', 'Yes, That', 'Very, Sir, is it yours?', 'Mine! I couldn re all done by one hand; a little hand it is, not so old as yours, but a very clever one.', 'A little hand indeed, Far beyond all his companions, in his learning and his sports too, how did he ever come to be so fond of me!  That I should love him is no wonder, but that he should love me--', 'I hope there is nothing the matter, sir,', 'Not much, my dear, I hoped to have seen him on the green to-night.  He was always foremost among them.  But he', 'Has he been ill?', 'Not very.  They said he was wandering in his head yesterday, dear boy, and so they said the day before.  But that s not a bad sign--not at all a bad sign.', 'If he could lean upon anybody  he said, returning into the room.   s too late for him to come out, for it s a heavy dew.  It t come to-night.', 'My favourite scholar! It is a little hand to have done all that, and waste away with sickness.  It is a very, very little hand!', 'It is a little hand to have done all that, and waste away with sickness.  It is a very, very little hand!', 'No, no better.  They even say he is worse.', 'I am very sorry for that, Sir,', 'If the journey you have before you is a long one, and don re very welcome to pass another night here. I should really be glad if you would, friend.', 'I shall be glad to have your young companion with me for one day.  If you can do a charity to a lone man, and rest yourself at the same time, do so.  If you must proceed upon your journey, I wish you well through it, and will walk a little way with you before school begins.', 'What are we to do, Nell? say what we', 'Have you many scholars, sir?', 'Are the others clever, sir?', 'Good boys, good boys enough, my dear, but they', 'I think, boys, that I shall give an extra half-holiday this afternoon.', 'that I shall give an extra half-holiday this afternoon.', 'You must promise me first, that you ll go away and be so--away out of the village I mean.  I t disturb your old playmate and companion.', 'Then pray don s my dear scholars, what I have asked you, and do it as a favour to me.  Be as happy as you can, and don', 'Thank  and ', 'It  said the poor schoolmaster, looking after them.   m very glad they didn', 'Oh, dame! is it so bad as this?', 'He  cried the old woman;  s dying.  It t see him now, but for his being so earnest on it.  This is what his learning has brought him to.  Oh dear, dear, dear, what can I do!', 'Do not say that I am in any fault, I am not hurt, dame.  No, no.  You are in great distress of mind, and don t.', 'I am not hurt, dame.  No, no.  You are in great distress of mind, and don t.', 'I do, I mean it all.  If he hadn', 'I hope I always was.  I meant to be, God knows,', 'Who is that? I am afraid to kiss her, lest I should make her ill.  Ask her to shake hands with me.', 'You remember the garden, Harry, and how pleasant it used to be in the evening time?  You must make haste to visit it again, for I think the very flowers have missed you, and are less gay than they used to be.  You will come soon, my dear, very soon now--won', 'The boys at play upon the green.', 'Shall I do it?', 'Please wave it at the window, Tie it to the lattice.  Some of them may see it there.  Perhaps they', 'Good fortune and happiness go with you! I am quite a solitary man now.  If you ever pass this way again, you', 'I am quite a solitary man now.  If you ever pass this way again, you', 'We shall never forget it, sir, nor ever forget to be grateful to you for your kindness to us.', 'I have heard such words from the lips of children very often, but they were soon forgotten.  I had attached one young friend to me, the better friend for being young--but that', 'Hey! Yes, to be sure--Who won the Helter-Skelter Plate, child?', 'Won what, ma', 'The Helter-Skelter Plate at the races, child--the plate that was run for on the second day.', 'On the second day, ma', 'Second day!  Yes, second day, Can re asked the question civilly?', 'I don am.', 'Don  repeated the lady of the caravan; ', 'And very sorry I was, to see you in company with a Punch; a low, practical, wulgar wretch, that people should scorn to look at.', 'I was not there by choice, we didn am?', 'Know   cried the lady of the caravan in a sort of shriek.  re young and inexperienced, and that d  d ', 'Know them!  But you s your excuse for asking sich a question.  Do I look as if I know em, does the caravan look as if it know em?', 'No, ma  said the child, fearing she had committed some grievous fault.  ', 'Come nearer, nearer still, Are you hungry, child?', 'Not very, but we are tired, and it', 'Well, hungry or not, you had better have some tea, I suppose you are agreeable to that, old gentleman?', 'Set  s the best place, Now hand up the teapot for a little more hot water, and a pinch of fresh tea, and then both of you eat and drink as much as you can, and don s all I ask of you.', 'Yes, Missus,', 'How did you find the cold pie, George?', 'It warn', 'And the beer, is it passable, George?', 'It  George returned,  t so bad for all that.', 'Have you nearly finished?', 'Wery nigh, mum.', 'I hope I haven', 'If you have, we must make up for it next time, that', 'We are not a heavy load, George?', 'That  replied the man, looking a long way round, as if he were appealing to Nature in general against such monstrous propositions.   ll always perceive that she never will keep her whip still; the horse can ll not bear something more.  What is the cause of this here?', 'Would these two travellers make much difference to the horses, if we took them with us?', 'They', 'Would they make much difference? They can', 'The weight o  said George, eyeing them with the look of a man who was calculating within half an ounce or so, ', 'Well, child, how do you like this way of travelling?', 'That  she continued.   t know what it is to be low in your feelings.  You always have your appetites too, and what a comfort that is.', 'There, child, read that.', 'Read it again,', 'Jarley', 'That  said the lady.  ', 'If I had a donkey,', 'Never go into the company of a filthy Punch any more, after this.', 'I never saw any wax-work, ma  said Nell.  ', 'Funnier! It is not funny at all.', 'Oh!', 'It isn  repeated Mrs Jarley.   s calm and--what s it--it d hardly know the difference.  I won ve seen wax-work quite like life, but I', 'Is it here, ma', 'Is what here, child?', 'The wax-work, ma', 'Why, bless you, child, what are you thinking of?  How could such a collection be here, where you see everything except the inside of one little cupboard and a few boxes?  It ll be exhibited the day after to-morrow. You are going to the same town, and you s natural to expect that you ve no doubt you will.  I suppose you couldn', 'I shall not be in the town, I think, ma', 'Not there! Then where will you be?', 'I--I--don', 'You don re travelling about the country without knowing where you  said the lady of the caravan.  ', 'We were there quite by accident, We are poor people, ma', 'You amaze me more and more, Why, what do you call yourselves?  Not beggars?', 'Indeed, ma t know what else we are,', 'Lord bless me, I never heard of such a thing.  Who', 'And yet you can read.  And write too, I shouldn', 'Yes, ma', 'Well, and what a thing that is, I can', 'And the old gentleman too, for I want to have a word with him.  Do you want a good situation for your grand-daughter, master?  If you do, I can put her in the way of getting one.  What do you say?', 'I can  answered the old man.   t separate.  What would become of me without her?', 'I should have thought you were old enough to take care of yourself, if you ever will be,', 'But he never will be, I fear he never will be again.  Pray do not speak harshly to him.  We are very thankful to you, but neither of us could part from the other if all the wealth of the world were halved between us.', 'If you  said Mrs Jarley,  em out to the company; they would be soon learnt, and she has a way with her that people wouldn ve been always accustomed to go round with visitors myself, which I should keep on doing now, only that my spirits make a little ease absolutely necessary.  It  said the lady, rising into the tone and manner in which she was accustomed to address her audiences;  s Jarley s very light and genteel, the company particularly select, the exhibition takes place in assembly-rooms, town-halls, large rooms at inns, or auction galleries.  There is none of your open-air wagrancy at Jarley s, remember.  Every expectation held out in the handbills is realised to the utmost, and the whole forms an effect of imposing brilliancy hitherto unrivalled in this kingdom.  Remember that the price of admission is only sixpence, and that this is an opportunity which may never occur again!', 'Now, child?', 'We are very much obliged to you, ma  said Nell, ', 'And you  returned Mrs Jarley.   m pretty sure of that.  So as that', 'Faster, sirrah! faster!', 'faster!', 'It  the boy pleaded.   ve come on very fast, considering.', '_You_ have come fast, considering! you creep, you dog, you crawl, you measure distance like a worm.  There are the chimes now, half-past twelve.', 'Come on then, or I shall be too late.  Faster--do you hear me?  Faster.', 'Because it does you good, when you s another blessing of your time of life--you can sleep so very sound.', 'Have you had a bad night, ma', 'I seldom have anything else, child, I sometimes wonder how I bear it.', 'The wan will come on to bring the boxes, t be their own masters and mistresses in such matters as these.  How do I look, child?', 'What, Mr Slum! Lot! who', "'Pon my soul and honour, that Pon my soul and honour that", "I came here, 'pon my soul and honour I hardly know what I came here for.  It would puzzle me to tell you, it would by Gad.  I wanted a little inspiration, a little freshening up, a little change of ideas, and--   said the military gentleman, checking himself and looking round the room,  s quite Minervian.", 'It', 'Well enough! Will you believe me when I say it ve exercised my pen upon this charming theme?  By the way--any orders?  Is there any little thing I can do for you?', 'It comes so very expensive, sir, and I really don', 'Hush!  No, no! No fibs.  I t say it don t say it.  I know better!', 'I don', 'Ha, ha! you re coming down.  Ask the perfumers, ask the blacking-makers, ask the hatters, ask the old lottery-office-keepers--ask any man among  s an honest man, he raises his eyes to heaven, and blesses the name of Slum--mark that!  You are acquainted with Westminster Abbey, Mrs Jarley?', 'Yes, surely.', 'Then upon my soul and honour, ma ll find in a certain angle of that dreary pile, called Poets  retorted that gentleman, tapping himself expressively on the forehead to imply that there was some slight quantity of brain behind it.   ve got a little trifle here, now, a little trifle here, thrown off in the heat of the moment, which I should say was exactly the thing you wanted to set this place on fire with.  It s a convertible one, and a positive inspiration for Jarley.  Have the acrostic.', 'I suppose it', 'Five shillings, Cheaper than any prose.', 'Cheaper than any prose.', 'I couldn', '--And six, Come.  Three-and-six.', 'That, is an unfortunate Maid of Honour in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, who died from pricking her finger in consequence of working upon a Sunday.  Observe the blood which is trickling from her finger; also the gold-eyed needle of the period, with which she is at work.', 'That, ladies and gentlemen, is Jasper Packlemerton of atrocious memory, who courted and married fourteen wives, and destroyed them all, by tickling the soles of their feet when they were sleeping in the consciousness of innocence and virtue.  On being brought to the scaffold and asked if he was sorry for what he had done, he replied yes, he was sorry for having let ', 'Your ears ought to be better than other folks  he said, retreating from the door and shading his eyes with his hands as the jagged lightning came again.  ', 'We didn', 'No wonder, with this lightning in one t want anything, you are not obliged to give an order.  Don s all.  The Valiant Soldier is pretty well known hereabouts.', 'Is this house called the Valiant Soldier, Sir?', 'I thought everybody knew that, Where have you come from, if you don', 'There an  said Mr Groves, no answer being returned,   to cross Jem Groves under his own roof.  There s not a hundred mile from here neither.  But he', 'Nell, they re playing cards, Don', 'Look sharp with that candle, it s thunder I expect.--Game!  Seven-and-sixpence to me, old Isaac.  Hand over.', 'Do you hear, Nell, do you hear them?', 'I haven  said a sharp cracked voice of most disagreeable quality, when a tremendous peal of thunder had died away,  s luck and his own, and as it was the kind of night for the Devil to be out and busy, I suppose he was looking over his shoulder, if anybody could have seen him.', 'Ah! for all old Luke', 'Do you hear what he says? Do you hear that, Nell?', 'Bear witness, that I always said it; that I knew it, dreamed of it, felt it was the truth, and that it must be so!  What money have we, Nell?  Come!  I saw you with money yesterday.  What money have we?  Give it to me.', 'No, no, let me keep it, grandfather, Let us go away from here.  Do not mind the rain.  Pray let us go.', 'Give it to me, I say, Hush, hush, don t mean it.  It', 'Do not take it, Pray do not take it, dear.  For both our sakes let me keep it, or let me throw it away--better let me throw it away, than you take it now.  Let us go; do let us go.', 'Give me the money, I must have it. There--there--that ll right thee one day, child, I', 'Now old gentleman, Do you know either of us?  This side of the screen is private, sir.', 'No offence, I hope,', 'But by G--, sir, there is offence, when you intrude yourself upon a couple of gentlemen who are particularly engaged.', 'when you intrude yourself upon a couple of gentlemen who are particularly engaged.', 'I had no intention to offend, I thought that--', 'But you had no right to think, sir, What the devil has a man at your time of life to do with thinking?', 'Now bully boy, can', 'Can  sneered Isaac in reply, mimicking as nearly as he could, in his shrill voice, the tones of the landlord.  ', 'Well then, do it, will you?', 'Who knows, but the gentleman may have civilly meant to ask if he might have the honour to take a hand with us!', 'I did mean it, That is what I mean.  That is what I want now!', 'I thought so, Then who knows but the gentleman, anticipating our objection to play for love, civilly desired to play for money?', 'Oh!  That indeed, if that s pardon.  Is this the gentleman  added Isaac, throwing it into the air and catching it dexterously, ', 'We  said the stout man.  ', 'Come; and we may be so happy,', 'We WILL be happy, Let me go, Nell. The means of happiness are on the cards and the dice.  We must rise from little winnings to great.  There s all for thee, my darling.', 'God help us! Oh! what hard fortune brought us here?', 'Hush! Fortune will not bear chiding.  We must not reproach her, or she shuns us; I have found that out.', 'Now, mister, If you', 'I am coming, Sit thee down, Nell, sit thee down and look on.  Be of good heart, it t tell them, no, no, or else they wouldn', 'The gentleman has thought better of it, and isn  said Isaac, making as though he would rise from the table.   m sorry the gentleman', 'Why I am ready.  You have all been slow but me, I wonder who is more anxious to begin than I.', 'See the curse of poverty, Nell, If I could have gone on a little longer, only a little longer, the luck would have turned on my side.  Yes, it', 'Put them away, Try to forget them.', 'Try to forget them! To forget them!  How are we ever to grow rich if I forget them?', 'No, no, Nell, they must not be forgotten.  We must make amends for this as soon as we can. Patience--patience, and we', 'Do you know what the time is? Past twelve o', '--And a rainy night,', 'The Valiant Soldier, by James Groves.  Good beds.  Cheap entertainment for man and beast, Half-past twelve o', 'It  said the uneasy child.   clock by the time we get back.  What would it cost, sir, if we stopped here?', 'Two good beds, one-and-sixpence; supper and beer one shilling; total two shillings and sixpence,', 'If I had had but that money before--If I had only known of it a few minutes ago!', 'We will decide to stop here if you please,', 'I think that  returned Mr Groves.  ', 'Will you give me the change here, if you please?', 'nobody.', 'God bless him! I see too well now, that they would indeed part us if they found us out, and shut him up from the light of the sun and sky.  He has only me to help him.  God bless us both!', 'Grandfather, do you think they are honest people at the house yonder?', 'Why? Do I think them honest--yes, they played honestly.', 'I  rejoined Nell.  ', 'Who would take money in jest? Those who take money, take it to keep.  Don', 'Then it was stolen out of my room, dear,', 'But is there no more, Nell? no more anywhere?  Was it all taken--every farthing of it--was there nothing left?', 'Nothing,', 'We must get more, we must earn it, Nell, hoard it up, scrape it together, come by it somehow.  Never mind this loss. Tell nobody of it, and perhaps we may regain it.  Don  he added in a compassionate tone, very different from the secret, cunning way in which he had spoken until now.  ', 'Not a word about it to any one but me, no, not even to me, for it can do no good.  All the losses that ever were, are not worth tears from thy eyes, darling.  Why should they be, when we will win them back?', 'Let them go, Let them go, once and for ever, and I would never shed another tear if every penny had been a thousand pounds.', 'Well, well, she knows no better.  I ought to be thankful of it.', 'But listen to me, will you listen to me?', 'Aye, aye, I  returned the old man, still without looking at her;  s, poor child.', 'Let me persuade you, then--oh, do let me persuade you, to think no more of gains or losses, and to try no fortune but the fortune we pursue together.', 'We pursue this aim together, Whose image sanctifies the game?', 'Have we been worse off, since you forgot these cares, and we have been travelling on together?  Have we not been much better and happier without a home to shelter us, than ever we were in that unhappy house, when they were on your mind?', 'She speaks the truth, It must not turn me, but it is the truth; no doubt it is.', 'Only remember what we have been since that bright morning when we turned our backs upon it for the last time, only remember what we have been since we have been free of all those miseries--what peaceful days and quiet nights we have had--what pleasant times we have known--what happiness we have enjoyed.  If we have been tired or hungry, we have been soon refreshed, and slept the sounder for it. Think what beautiful things we have seen, and how contented we have felt.  And why was this blessed change?', 'We haven  said Mrs Jarley when the meal was over,  s young ladies all the time we s twenty-six of  em with a parcel of new bills, and you shall take it, my dear, and see what effect that has upon ', 'You', 'Yes, ma', 'And don  said Miss Monflathers, who was of rather uncertain temper, and lost no opportunity of impressing moral truths upon the tender minds of the young ladies, ', 'Don  said Miss Monflathers,  s very naughty and unfeminine, and a perversion of the properties wisely and benignantly transmitted to us, with expansive powers to be roused from their dormant state through the medium of cultivation?', 'Don  resumed Miss Monflathers,  t you know that the harder you are at work, the happier you are?', 'to be a wax-work child, when you might have the proud consciousness of assisting, to the extent of your infant powers, the manufactures of your country; of improving your mind by the constant contemplation of the steam-engine; and of earning a comfortable and independent subsistence of from two-and-ninepence to three shillings per week? Don', '"How doth the little--"', 'Eh? Who said that?', 'The little busy bee,', 'It was Miss Edwards who did that, I KNOW, Now I am sure that was Miss Edwards.', 'Is it not, a most remarkable thing, Miss Edwards, that you have an attachment to the lower classes which always draws you to their sides; or, rather, is it not a most extraordinary thing that all I say and do will not wean you from propensities which your original station in life have unhappily rendered habitual to you, you extremely vulgar-minded girl?', 'I really intended no harm, ma  said a sweet voice.  ', 'An impulse! I wonder that you presume to speak of impulses to me I am astonished I suppose it is an impulse which induces you to take the part of every grovelling and debased person that comes in your way', 'But I would have you know, Miss Edwards, that you cannot be permitted--if it be only for the sake of preserving a proper example and decorum in this establishment--that you cannot be permitted, and that you shall not be permitted, to fly in the face of your superiors in this exceedingly gross manner.  If you have no reason to feel a becoming pride before wax-work children, there are young ladies here who have, and you must either defer to those young ladies or leave the establishment, Miss Edwards.', 'You will not take the air to-day, Miss Edwards, Have the goodness to retire to your own room, and not to leave it without permission.', 'She has passed me without any salute! She has actually passed me without the slightest acknowledgment of my presence!', 'As for you, you wicked child, tell your mistress that if she presumes to take the liberty of sending to me any more, I will write to the legislative authorities and have her put in the stocks, or compelled to do penance in a white sheet; and you may depend upon it that you shall certainly experience the treadmill if you dare to come here again.  Now ladies, on.', 'tell your mistress that if she presumes to take the liberty of sending to me any more, I will write to the legislative authorities and have her put in the stocks, or compelled to do penance in a white sheet; and you may depend upon it that you shall certainly experience the treadmill if you dare to come here again.  Now ladies, on.', 'to turn atheist when I think of it!', 'For which of us is best off, I wonder, she or me! It', 'Get me money, I must have money, Nell.  It shall be paid thee back with gallant interest one day, but all the money that comes into thy hands, must be mine--not for myself, but to use for thee.  Remember, Nell, to use for thee!', 'Quite happy now, But always? Ah, sister, why do you turn away your face?', 'and we can be together all the day.', 'Why not at night-time too? Dear sister, would they be angry with you for that?', 'Are we going from this place directly, ma', 'Look here, child, That', 'For now that the schools are gone, and the regular sight-seers exhausted, we come to the General Public, and they want stimulating.', 'So be in time, be in time, be in time, Remember that this is Jarley', 'BRASS, Solicitor, First floor to let to a single gentleman,', 'Have you nearly done, Sammy?', 'No, It would have been all done though, if you had helped at the right time.', 'Oh yes, indeed, you want my help, don', 'Am I going to keep a clerk for my own pleasure, or because of my own wish, you provoking rascal! What do you taunt me about going to keep a clerk for?', 'What do you taunt me, after three hours  repeated Mr Brass, grinning again with the pen in his mouth, like some nobleman s crest.  ', 'All I know is, that if every one of your clients is to force us to keep a clerk, whether we want to or not, you had better leave off business, strike yourself off the roll, and get taken in execution, as soon as you can.', 'Have we got any other client like him? Have we got another client like him now--will you answer me that?', 'Do you mean in the face!', 'Do I mean in the face! Look here--Daniel Quilp, Esquire--Daniel Quilp, Esquire--Daniel Quilp, Esquire--all through.  Whether should I take a clerk that he recommends, and says, "this is the man for you," or lose all this, eh?', 'But I know what it is, You t have as long a finger in the business as you t see through that?', 'The business wouldn  returned his sister composedly.   t you be a fool and provoke me, Sammy, but mind what you', 'If I determined that the clerk ought not to come, of course he wouldn t talk nonsense.', 'Hallo! Is there anybody at home?  Is there any of the Devil', 'Ha, ha, ha! Oh, very good, Sir!  Oh, very good indeed!  Quite eccentric!  Dear me, what humour he has!', 'Is that my Sally? Is it Justice with the bandage off her eyes, and without the sword and scales?  Is it the Strong Arm of the Law?  Is it the Virgin of Bevis?', 'What an amazing flow of spirits! Upon my word, it', 'Open the door, I s another lawyer near and he should happen to look out of window, he', 'There she is, there is the woman I ought to have married--there is the beautiful Sarah--there is the female who has all the charms of her sex and none of their weaknesses. Oh Sally, Sally!', 'Hard-hearted as the metal from which she takes her name, Why don', 'Why don', 'Hold your nonsense, Mr Quilp, do, I wonder you', 'The strange young man, is too susceptible himself not to understand me well.  This is Mr Swiveller, my intimate friend--a gentleman of good family and great expectations, but who, having rather involved himself by youthful indiscretion, is content for a time to fill the humble station of a clerk--humble, but here most enviable.  What a delicious atmosphere!', 'is too susceptible himself not to understand me well.  This is Mr Swiveller, my intimate friend--a gentleman of good family and great expectations, but who, having rather involved himself by youthful indiscretion, is content for a time to fill the humble station of a clerk--humble, but here most enviable.  What a delicious atmosphere!', 'Mr Swiveller, being pretty well accustomed to the agricultural pursuits of sowing wild oats, Miss Sally, prudently considers that half a loaf is better than no bread.  To be out of harm s offer.  Brass, Mr Swiveller is yours.', 'I am very glad, Sir, very glad indeed.  Mr Swiveller, Sir, is fortunate enough to have your friendship.  You may be very proud, Sir, to have the friendship of Mr Quilp.', 'I suppose, that Mr Swiveller enters upon his duties at once?  It', 'At once, if you please, Sir, by all means,', 'Miss Sally will teach him law, the delightful study of the law, she s Best Companion.', 'He is exceedingly eloquent, he has an extraordinary flow of language.  Beautiful, really.', 'With Miss Sally, and the beautiful fictions of the law, his days will pass like minutes.  Those charming creations of the poet, John Doe and Richard Roe, when they first dawn upon him, will open a new world for the enlargement of his mind and the improvement of his heart.', 'Oh, beautiful, beautiful!  Beau-ti-ful indeed! It', 'Where will Mr Swiveller sit?', 'Why, we  returned Brass.   t any thoughts of having a gentleman with us, sir, until you were kind enough to suggest it, and our accommodation ll look about for a second-hand stool, sir.  In the meantime, if Mr Swiveller will take my seat, and try his hand at a fair copy of this ejectment, as I shall be out pretty well all the morning--', 'Walk with me, I have a word or two to say to you on points of business.  Can you spare the time?', 'Can I spare the time to walk with you, sir?  You re joking with me, I s not everybody, sir, who has an opportunity of improving himself by the conversation of Mr Quilp.', 'I am going out,', 'Very good, ma  returned Dick.   t hurry yourself on my account to come back, ma', 'If anybody comes on office business, take their messages, and say that the gentleman who attends to that matter isn', 'I will, ma', 'I shan', 'I am, I hope you may be unexpectedly detained, ma am, but not seriously, so much the better.', 'So I s clerk, am I? Brass s sister--clerk to a female Dragon.  Very good, very good!  What shall I be next?  Shall I be a convict in a felt hat and a grey suit, trotting about a dockyard with my number neatly embroidered on my uniform, and the order of the garter on my leg, restrained from chafing my ankle by a twisted belcher handkerchief?  Shall I be that? Will that do, or is it too genteel?  Whatever you please, have it your own way, of course.', 'Quilp offers me this place, which he says he can insure me, Fred, who, I could have taken my affidavit, would not have heard of such a thing, backs Quilp to my astonishment, and urges me to take it also--staggerer, number one!  My aunt in the country stops the supplies, and writes an affectionate note to say that she has made a new will, and left me out of it--staggerer, number two.  No money; no credit; no support from Fred, who seems to turn steady all at once; notice to quit the old lodgings--staggerers, three, four, five, and six!  Under an accumulation of staggerers, no man can be considered a free agent.  No man knocks himself down; if his destiny knocks him down, his destiny must pick him up again.  Then I  said Mr Swiveller, taking his leave of the ceiling with a significant nod, ', 'Come in! Don ve many more customers.  Come in!', 'Oh, please, will you come and show the lodgings?', 'Why, who are you?', 'I hav t got anything to do with the lodgings, Tell ', 'Oh, but please will you come and show the lodgings, It', 'Why don em yourself?  You seem to know all about ', 'Miss Sally said I wasn t believe the attendance was good if they saw how small I was first.', 'Well, but they t they?', 'Ah!  But then they em for a fortnight certain, and people don re once settled.', 'This is a queer sort of thing, What do you mean to say you are--the cook?', 'Yes, I do plain cooking; I', 'I suppose Brass and the Dragon and I do the dirtiest part of it,', 'I believe, sir, that you desire to look at these apartments.  They are very charming apartments, sir.  They command an uninterrupted view of--of over the way, and they are within one minute', 'What', 'One pound per week,', 'I em.', 'The boots and clothes are extras, and the fires in winter time are--', 'Are all agreed to,', 'Two weeks certain, are the--', 'Two weeks! Two years.  I shall live here for two years.  Here.  Ten pounds down.  The bargain', 'Why you see, my name is not Brass, and--', 'Who said it was?  My name', 'The name of the master of the house is,', 'I  returned the single gentleman;  s a good name for a lawyer.  Coachman, you may go.  So may you, Sir.', 'Take down the bill, and let nobody call me till I ring the bell.', 'This is a most remarkable and supernatural sort of house! She-dragons in the business, conducting themselves like professional gentlemen; plain cooks of three feet high appearing mysteriously from under ground; strangers walking in and going to bed without leave or licence in the middle of the day!  If he should be one of the miraculous fellows that turn up now and then, and has gone to sleep for two years, I shall be in a pleasant situation.  It t. But it', 'She-dragons in the business, conducting themselves like professional gentlemen; plain cooks of three feet high appearing mysteriously from under ground; strangers walking in and going to bed without leave or licence in the middle of the day!  If he should be one of the miraculous fellows that turn up now and then, and has gone to sleep for two years, I shall be in a pleasant situation.  It t. But it', 'Good morning, Mr Richard, s clerkship.   s a rare fellow at a bargain, I can tell you, Mr Richard.  You', 'It', 'You  returned Mr Brass.   s all.', 'I hope it hasn  said Dick, sitting himself down discontentedly, between Mr Sampson and the chaste Sally.  ', 'Then we get a bit of timber in, Sir, Ha, ha, ha! We get a bit of timber in, Sir, and that s going to market for us.  Miss Brass, Mr Richard is the--', 'Will you keep quiet? How am I to work if you keep on chattering?', 'What an uncertain chap you are! Sometimes you re all for work.  A man never knows what humour he', 'I  said Sally,  t disturb me, if you please.  And don  Miss Sally pointed with the feather of her pen to Richard,  t do more than he can help, I dare say.', 'done it.', 'Done what, ma', 'Do you know, that the lodger isn', 'Well, ma  said Dick, ', 'Ah!  I begin to think he', 'It  said Brass, laying down his pen;  ll remember, if this gentleman should be found to have hung himself to the bed-post, or any unpleasant accident of that kind should happen--you  rent?  You', 'really, very remarkable.  Mr Richard, you ll remember, Mr Richard, that this ten pound note was given to you in part payment of two years ll bear that in mind, Mr Richard; you had better make a note of it, sir, in case you should ever be called upon to give evidence.', 'We can never be too cautious, There is a deal of wickedness going about the world, a deal of wickedness.  Did the gentleman happen to say, Sir--but never mind that at present, sir; finish that little memorandum first.', 'Oh, this is the memorandum, is it? Very good.  Now, Mr Richard, did the gentleman say anything else?', 'No.', 'Are you sure, Mr Richard, that the gentleman said nothing else?', 'Devil a word, Sir,', 'Think again, Sir, it s my duty, Sir, as an honourable member of that profession, not to put to you a leading question in a matter of this delicacy and importance.  Did the gentleman, Sir, who took the first floor of you yesterday afternoon, and who brought with him a box of property--a box of property--say anything more than is set down in this memorandum?', 'Come, don', 'Pooh, pooh!  Deuce take it, Mr Richard, how dull you are! Did he say anything about his property?--there!', 'That', 'Did he say, for instance, I don  added Brass, still more comfortably and cozily than before, ', 'Certainly not,', 'Why then, Mr Richard, it ve mistaken your calling, and will never make a lawyer.', 'Not if you live a thousand years,', 'Mr Richard, this man s to be done?', 'I should let him have his sleep out,', 'Sleep out! why he has been asleep now, six-and-twenty hours.  We have been moving chests of drawers over his head, we have knocked double knocks at the street-door, we have made the servant-girl fall down stairs several times (she t hurt her much,) but nothing wakes him.', 'Perhaps a ladder, and getting in at the first-floor window--', 'But then there', 'What do you say to getting on the roof of the house through the trap-door, and dropping down the chimney?', 'That would be an excellent plan, if anybody would be-- would be kind, and friendly, and generous enough, to undertake it.  I dare say it would not be anything like as disagreeable as one supposes.', 'There are his boots, Mr Richard!', 'Very obstinate-looking articles they are too,', 'I can  said Brass, applying his eye to the keyhole of the door.  ', 'Very,', 'It would be an extremely unpleasant circumstance if he was to bounce out suddenly, Keep the stairs clear.  I should be more than a match for him, of course, but I', 'Have YOU been making that horrible noise?', 'I have been helping, sir,', 'How dare you then, Eh?', 'Is my peace nothing?', 'Is their peace nothing, sir? I don re not sat upon by the coroner and buried in a cross road before you wake.  We have been distracted with fears that you were dead, Sir, and the short and the long of it is, that we cannot allow single gentlemen to come into this establishment and sleep like double gentlemen without paying extra for it.', 'Indeed!', 'Yes, Sir, indeed, an equal quantity of slumber was never got out of one bed and bedstead, and if you', 'Come here, you impudent rascal!', 'Can you drink anything?', 'Hot water-- extraordinary rum--sugar--and a travelling glass.  Mix for yourself.  And make haste.', 'The man of the house is a lawyer, is he not?', 'The woman of the house--what', 'A dragon,', 'I want to do as I like, young man, to go to bed when I like, get up when I like, come in when I like, go out when I like--to be asked no questions and be surrounded by no spies.  In this last respect, servants are the devil.  There', 'to go to bed when I like, get up when I like, come in when I like, go out when I like--to be asked no questions and be surrounded by no spies.  In this last respect, servants are the devil.  There', 'And a very little one,', 'And a very little one, Well, the place will suit me, will it?', 'Yes,', 'Sharks, I suppose?', 'Let them know my humour, If they disturb me, they lose a good tenant.  If they know me to be that, they know enough.  If they try to know more, it s better to understand these things at once.  Good day.', 'I beg your pardon, When he who adores thee has left but the name--', 'What do you mean?', '--But the name, has left but the name--in case of letters or parcels--', 'I never have any,', 'Or in the case anybody should call.', 'Nobody ever calls on me.', 'If any mistake should arise from not having the name, don  added Dick, still lingering.--', 'I', 'It  thought Dick one day, as he sat contemplating the features of Miss Sally Brass.   t be.  And they have a habit of combing their hair, which she hasn s a dragon.', 'Where are you going, old fellow?', 'To dinner,', 'To dinner! that t believe that small servant ever has anything to eat.', 'Sammy won  said Miss Brass.   n', 'Now, I m marked with a note of interrogation somewhere.  My feelings I smother, but thou hast been the cause of this anguish, my--upon my word, s chair, ', 'I m marked with a note of interrogation somewhere.  My feelings I smother, but thou hast been the cause of this anguish, my--upon my word, s chair, ', 'Are you there?', 'Yes, ma', 'Go further away from the leg of mutton, or you', 'Do you see this?', 'Then don  retorted Miss Sally,  t meat here.  There, eat it up.', 'You  said Miss Brass, summing up the facts;  re asked if you want any more, and you answer,   Then don', 'Come, this is two days without a Punch. I em all, at last.', 'Why are you in hopes? What harm do they do?', 'Here  cried Brass, laying down his pen in despair.   s an aggravating animal!', 'Well, what harm do they do?', 'What harm! Is it no harm to have a constant hallooing and hooting under one s teeth with vexation?  Is it no harm to be blinded and choked up, and have the king', 'Brass,', 'Ah! of brass, Is that no harm?', 'There  repeated Brass;  d give eighteen-pence and never grudge it!', 'I wish I only knew who his friends were, if they s Inn Coffee House and give me the job, I', 'Both of you, I want to talk to you.  Come both of you!', 'Come, Tommy,', 'I an  replied the other.  ', 'Don s got a bottle and glass up there?', 'And couldn  retorted the other with sudden alacrity.   t you no manners?', 'Now, my men, you have done very well. What will you take?  Tell that little man behind, to shut the door.', 'Shut the door, can  said Mr Codlin, turning gruffly to his friend.  ', 'You  said their entertainer.  ', 'To fairs, markets, races, and so forth, I suppose?', 'Yes, sir, pretty nigh all over the West of England.', 'I have talked to men of your craft from North, East, and South, but I never lighted on any from the West before.', 'It lar summer circuit is the West, master, that s the hard day ve had down in the West.', 'that s the hard day ve had down in the West.', 'Let me fill your glass again.', 'Much obleeged to you sir, I think I will, s aside.   m the sufferer, sir, in all the travelling, and in all the staying at home.  In town or country, wet or dry, hot or cold, Tom Codlin suffers.  But Tom Codlin isn t his place to grumble.  That', 'Codlin an  observed Short with an arch look,  t always keep his eyes open.  He falls asleep sometimes, you know.  Remember them last races, Tommy.', 'but he don', 'Will you never leave off aggravating a man? It t it?  I was attending to my business, and couldn t a match for an old man and a young child, you an t throw that out against me, for the cap fits your head quite as correct as it fits mine.', 'You may as well drop the subject, Tom, It isn', 'Then you shouldn  returned Mr Codlin;  s pardon on your account, as a giddy chap that likes to hear himself talk, and don', 'You are the two men I want, the two men I have been looking for, and searching after!  Where are that old man and that child you speak of?', 'Sir?', 'The old man and his grandchild who travelled with you--where are they? It will be worth your while to speak out, I assure you; much better worth your while than you believe.  They left you, you say--at those races, as I understand.  They have been traced to that place, and there lost sight of.  Have you no clue, can you suggest no clue, to their recovery?', 'Did I always say, Thomas, that there was sure to be an inquiry after them two travellers?', 'YOU said! Did I always say that that  s my friend," she says, with a tear of gratitude a trickling down her little eye; "Codlin s very well," she says; "I t look it."', 's my friend," she says, with a tear of gratitude a trickling down her little eye; "Codlin s very well," she says; "I t look it."', 'Good Heaven! have I found these men at last, only to discover that they can give me no information or assistance!  It would have been better to have lived on, in hope, from day to day, and never to have lighted on them, than to have my expectations scattered thus.', 'have I found these men at last, only to discover that they can give me no information or assistance!  It would have been better to have lived on, in hope, from day to day, and never to have lighted on them, than to have my expectations scattered thus.', 'Stay a minute, A man of the name of Jerry--you know Jerry, Thomas?', 'Oh, don  replied Mr Codlin.   ere darling child? "Codlin t object to Short," she says, "but I cotton to Codlin." Once, she called me Father Codlin.  I thought I should have bust!', 's my friend," she says, "dear, good, kind Codlin, as is always a devising pleasures for me!  I don  said that gentleman reflectively, ', 'A man of the name of Jerry, sir, wot keeps a company of dancing dogs, told me, in a accidental sort of way, that he had seen the old gentleman in connexion with a travelling wax-work, unbeknown to him. As they d been seen, I took no measures about it, and asked no questions--But I can, if you like.', 'Is this man in town? Speak faster.', 'No he isn', 'Then bring him here, Here ll do so for your own sakes.  Now, give me your address, and leave me.', 'taking a sight,', 'Pull up, Snobby, You', 'You', 'Has Mr Abel forgotten anything, I wonder?', 'Ask no questions, Snobby, but go and see. Woa-a-a then, will you?  If that pony was mine, I', 'You must be very gentle with him, if you please, or you d better not keep on pulling his ears, please.  I know he won', 'Oh! come in, Christopher,', 'Is that the lad?', 'That  said Mr Witherden.  ', 'Your servant, sir,', 'Yours, sir, I  replied Mr Abel mildly.  ', 'Yes, I was.  Have I your permission?', 'By all means.', 'My business is no secret; or I should rather say it need be no secret here, It relates to a dealer in curiosities with whom he lived, and in whom I am earnestly and warmly interested.  I have been a stranger to this country, gentlemen, for very many years, and if I am deficient in form and ceremony, I hope you will forgive me.', 'No forgiveness is necessary, sir;--none whatever,', 'I have been making inquiries in the neighbourhood in which his old master lived, and I learn that he was served by this lad.  I have found out his mother s the cause of my presenting myself here this morning.', 'I am very glad of any cause, sir, which procures me the honour of this visit.', 'Sir, you speak like a mere man of the world, and I think you something better.  Therefore, pray do not sink your real character in paying unmeaning compliments to me.', 'Hem! You', 'And a plain dealer, It may be my long absence and inexperience that lead me to the conclusion; but if plain speakers are scarce in this part of the world, I fancy plain dealers are still scarcer.  If my speaking should offend you, sir, my dealing, I hope, will make amends.', 'If you think, my lad, that I am pursuing these inquiries with any other view than that of serving and reclaiming those I am in search of, you do me a very great wrong, and deceive yourself.  Don  he added, turning again to the Notary and his pupil, ', 'Not by inquiry, I live there.', 'Live at Brass s!', 'Aye, I entered on his lodgings t s--more shame for me, I suppose?', 'That  said the Notary, shrugging his shoulders.  ', 'Doubtful? I am glad to hear there', 'I  he said, putting a crown into Kit You shall hear from me again.  Not a word of this, you know, except to your master and mistress.', 'Mother, sir, would be glad to know--', 'Glad to know what?', 'Anything--so that it was no harm--about Miss Nell.', 'Would she?  Well then, you may tell her if she can keep a secret.  But mind, not a word of this to anybody else.  Don', 'I  said Kit.  ', 'Hallo! who is that?', 'He called to see my Governor this morning, beyond that, I don', 'beyond that, I don', 'At least you know his name?', 'All I know, my dear feller, is, that he is the cause of my having stood here twenty minutes, for which I hate him with a mortal and undying hatred, and would pursue him to the confines of eternity if I could afford the time.', 'He is a very nice gentleman, Sir, and that', 'It  said Richard.  ', 'We s-his-name, --that was talking to you this morning, you know--I know him--a good fellow, but eccentric--very--here s-his-name!', 'He lives in my house, at least in the house occupied by the firm in which I', 'I must be going, sir, if you please,', 'Don  replied his patron,  ll drink your mother.', 'Thank you, sir.', 'An excellent woman that mother of yours, Christopher, Who ran to catch me when I fell, and kissed the place to make it well?  My mother.  A charming woman.  He', 'Humph! this is queer.  Nothing but mysteries in connection with Brass ll keep my own counsel, however.  Everybody and anybody has been in my confidence as yet, but now I think I', 'And we are both widows too! s mother.  ', 'I haven  returned Mrs Nubbles.   t know each other sooner.', 'But then, you know, it  said Barbara to have it brought about by one s fully made up for.  Now, an', 'As handsome as her? Double as handsome.', 'Oh Christopher! I', 'Nonsense! She was well enough, I don', 'Oh Christopher!', 'You are, any day, --and so', 'Well, Christopher, and so you have made a new friend, eh?', 'I beg your pardon, Sir?', 'You have made a new friend, I hear from Mr Abel, at the office!', 'Oh!  Yes Sir, yes.  He behaved very handsome, Sir.', 'I  returned the old gentlemen with a smile.  ', 'Indeed, Sir!  It t want him to, I', 'He is rather anxious, to have you in his own service--take care what you', 'To have me in his service, Sir? Why, Sir, I don', 'Why, Sir, I don', 'Oh!  But he is indeed, And he has told Mr Abel so.', 'I never heard of such a thing! I wonder at him; that I do.', 'You see, Christopher, this is a point of much importance to you, and you should understand and consider it in that light.  This gentleman is able to give you more money than I--not, I hope, to carry through the various relations of master and servant, more kindness and confidence, but certainly, Christopher, to give you more money.', 'Well, after that, Sir--', 'Wait a moment, That is not all.  You were a very faithful servant to your old employers, as I understand, and should this gentleman recover them, as it is his purpose to attempt doing by every means in his power, I have no doubt that you, being in his service, would meet with your reward.  Besides, besides having the pleasure of being again brought into communication with those to whom you seem to be very strongly and disinterestedly attached.  You must think of all this, Christopher, and not be rash or hasty in your choice.', 'He has no right to think that I  said Kit, turning round again after half a minute Does he think I', 'He may, perhaps, Christopher, if you refuse his offer,', 'Then let him, sir, what do I care, sir, what he thinks?  why should I care for his thinking, sir, when I know that I should be a fool, and worse than a fool, sir, to leave the kindest master and mistress that ever was or can be, who took me out of the streets a very poor and hungry lad indeed--poorer and hungrier perhaps than even you think for, sir--to go to him or anybody?  If Miss Nell was to come back, ma  added Kit, turning suddenly to his mistress,  ll be rich as old master always said she would, and being a rich young lady, what could she want of me?  No, no, she', 'why that would be another thing, and perhaps if she wanted me, I might ask you now and then to let me work for her when all was done at home. But when she comes back, I see now that she  added Kit, shaking his head sorrowfully,  ll never want me any more, and bless her, I hope she never may, though I should like to see her too!', 'There  said Kit-- am (and he knows so well I am?  Here am.  Would Mr Abel part with me, Sir, or is there anybody that could be fonder of the garden, ma s heart, Sir, and even little Jacob would have sense enough to cry his eyes out, ma', 'Oh! ask the messenger to walk this way.', 'At the same time, Christopher, if the gentleman should want to borrow you now and then for an hour or so, or even a day or so, at a time, we must consent to lend you, and you must consent to be lent.--Oh! here is the young gentleman.  How do you do, Sir?', 'Hope I see you well sir, Hope I see YOU well, ma', 'You want to take Kit back with you, I find?', 'I have got a chariot-cab waiting on purpose, A very spanking grey in that cab, sir, if you', 'And now that the nag has got his wind again, I', 'Christopher, I have found your old master and young mistress.', 'No, Sir!  Have you, though? Where are they, Sir?  How are they, Sir?  Are they--are they near here?', 'A long way from here, But I am going away to-night to bring them back, and I want you to go with me.', 'Me, Sir?', 'The place, indicated by this man of the dogs, is--how far from here--sixty miles?', 'From sixty to seventy.', 'Humph!  If we travel post all night, we shall reach there in good time to-morrow morning.  Now, the only question is, as they will not know me, and the child, God bless her, would think that any stranger pursuing them had a design upon her grandfather', 'Certainly not, Take Christopher by all means.', 'I beg your pardon, Sir, but if that m afraid I should do more harm than good--Miss Nell, Sir, she knows me, and would trust in me, I am sure; but old master--I don m afraid.  I', 'Another difficulty! Was ever man so beset as I?  Is there nobody else that knew them, nobody else in whom they had any confidence?  Solitary as their lives were, is there no one person who would serve my purpose?', 'IS there, Christopher?', 'Not one, Sir, Yes, though--there', 'Did they know her?', 'Know her, Sir! why, she was always coming backwards and forwards. They were as kind to her as they were to me.  Bless you, Sir, she expected they', 'Then where the devil is the woman? Why isn', 'Now, if she should be out, and I not able to find her, this impatient gentleman would be in a pretty taking.  And sure enough there s fast.  Now, God forgive me for saying so, but if this is Little Bethel', 'Me, She', 'Then pray tell me where it is, for I have come on a pressing matter, and must fetch her out, even if she was in the pulpit.', 'And now I  thought Kit, gliding into the nearest empty pew which was opposite his mother how am I ever to get at her, or persuade her to come out!  I might as well be twenty miles off.  She s all over, and there goes the clock again!  If he would but leave off for a minute, or if they', 'If I must do it openly, I must, s, and as Mr Swiveller would have observed if he had been present, ', 'Hush, mother! Come along with me, I', 'Where am I?', 'In this blessed Little Bethel,', 'Blessed indeed! Oh, Christopher, how have I been edified this night!', 'Yes, yes, I know, but come along, mother, everybody t make a noise--bring Jacob--that', 'Stay, Satan, stay!', 'This gentleman says you', 'Stay, Satan, stay! Tempt not the woman that doth incline her ear to thee, but harken to the voice of him that calleth.  He hath a lamb from the fold! He beareth off a lamb, a precious lamb!  He goeth about, like a wolf in the night season, and inveigleth the tender lambs!', 'He', 'He isn  said Kit indignantly.   t call me names if you please; what harm have I done?  I shouldn em away, unless I was obliged, you may depend upon that.  I wanted to do it very quiet, but you wouldn', 'Oh Kit! what have you done!  I never can go there again--never!', 'I s the way you do.  If you re sorry for it.  More shame for you, mother, I was going to say.', 'Hush, dear! you don re talking sinfulness.', 'Don  retorted Kit.   t believe, mother, that harmless cheerfulness and good humour are thought greater sins in Heaven than shirt-collars are, and I do believe that those chaps are just about as right and sensible in putting down the one as in leaving off the other--that t say anything more about it, if you s all; and you take the baby that ll give you the news I bring, which will surprise you a little, I can tell you.  There--that d never seen Little Bethel in all your life, as I hope you never will again; and here s one, you tell him it s said for a twelvemonth, and that if he s what you', 'There  said Kit when they reached home.   s a bandbox.  Throw in what you want, and we', 'With four horses I declare! Well you ARE going to do it, mother!  Here she is, Sir. Here s quite ready, sir.', 'That  returned the gentleman.   t be in a flutter, ma ll be taken great care of.  Where', 'Here it is, In with it, Christopher.', 'All right, Sir, Quite ready now, sir.', 'Then come along,', 'on foot with nobody to speak to them or say a kind word at parting, and they ll forget that she taught me to write--', 'Well, are you going? s face.   re your own master, I hope?', 'Don  returned Isaac List, who was squatting like a frog on the other side of the fire, and had so screwed himself up that he seemed to be squinting all over;  t mean any offence.', 'You keep me poor, and plunder me, and make a sport and jest of me besides, Ye', 'Confound you, what do you mean? Keep you poor!  You t you?  That re martyrs; but I don  cried the fellow, raising his voice--', 'You yourself were speaking of plunder just now, you know.  Don', 'Not of plundering among present company!  Honour among--among gentlemen, Sir,', 'Don  said Isaac List.   s very sorry for giving offence.  There--go on with what you were saying--go on.', 'I  cried Mr Jowl,  t be taken, and that I shall get nothing but abuse for my pains.  But that ve gone through life.  Experience has never put a chill upon my warm-heartedness.', 'I tell you he t I? and that he wishes you', 'Does he wish it?', 'Ay, Go on, go on.  It t do it; go on.', 'Go on, go on.  It t do it; go on.', 'I go on then, where I left off, when you got up so quick. If you s time for luck to turn, as it certainly is, and find that you haven s where it is, for you know, yourself, that you never have the funds to keep on long enough at a sitting), help yourself to what seems put in your way on purpose.  Borrow it, I say, and, when you', 'Certainly, if this good lady as keeps the wax-works has money, and does keep it in a tin box when she goes to bed, and doesn ve been religiously brought up.', 'You see, Isaac, you see, Isaac, strangers are going in and out every hour of the day; nothing would be more likely than for one of these strangers to get under the good lady d give him his revenge to the last farthing he brought, whatever the amount was.', 'But could you? Is your bank strong enough?', 'Strong enough! Here, you Sir, give me that box out of the straw!', 'Do you see this? Do you hear it?  Do you know the sound of gold?  There, put it back--and don ve got one of your own.', 'Do you hear it?  Do you know the sound of gold?  There, put it back--and don ve got one of your own.', 'My advice, is plain--I have given it, in fact.  I act as a friend.  Why should I help a man to the means perhaps of winning all I have, unless I considered him my friend?  It s my constitution, and I can t blame me, Isaac List.', 'I blame you! not for the world, Mr Jowl.  I wish I could afford to be as liberal as you; and, as you say, he might pay it back if he won--and if he lost--', 'You', 'But suppose he did (and nothing s better to lose other people s own, I hope?', 'Ah! the pleasures of winning!  The delight of picking up the money--the bright, shining yellow-boys--and sweeping  s pocket!  The deliciousness of having a triumph at last, and thinking that one didn re not going, old gentleman?', 'I  said the old man, who had risen and taken two or three hurried steps away, and now returned as hurriedly.   ll have it, every penny.', 'Why, that  cried Isaac, jumping up and slapping him on the shoulder;  s half sorry he advised you now.  We', 'He gives me my revenge, mind, mind--he stakes coin against coin, down to the last one in the box, be there many or few.  Remember that!', 'I  returned Isaac.   ll see fair between you.', 'I have passed my word, and I', 'I must have the money first, and that I', 'Why not to-night?', 'It  said the old man.  ', 'Then to-morrow be it, A drop of comfort here.  Luck to the best man!  Fill!', 'God be merciful to us! and help us in this trying hour!  What shall I do to save him!', 'So, it s three weeks ago, since we first put this in his head.  What', 'Whatever he brings, it', 'What', 'I have had a dreadful dream, A dreadful, horrible dream.  I have had it once before.  It is a dream of grey-haired men like you, in darkened rooms by night, robbing sleepers of their gold. Up, up!', 'Not to me, not to me--to Heaven, to save us from such deeds!  This dream is too real.  I cannot sleep, I cannot stay here, I cannot leave you alone under the roof where such dreams come. Up!  We must fly.', 'There is no time to lose; I will not lose one minute, Up! and away with me!', 'Up! and away with me!', 'To-night?', 'Yes, to-night, To-morrow night will be too late. The dream will have come again.  Nothing but flight can save us.  Up!', 'Holloa! What', 'We were only asleep, Sir, We have been walking all night.', 'A pair of queer travellers to be walking all night, One of you is a trifle too old for that sort of work, and the other a trifle too young.  Where are you going?', 'Where have you come from?', 'I thought somebody had been robbing and ill-using you, might be, That', 'Did you call to me?', 'You may go with us if you like, We', 'We', 'You  said this gentleman;  ve got evidence for, and the memory m never wrong.  Let me hear a song this minute.', 'I don', 'You know forty-seven songs, Forty-seven em--the best.  Give me a song this minute.', 'We must sleep in the open air to-night, dear, and to-morrow we will beg our way to some quiet part of the country, and try to earn our bread in very humble work.', 'Why did you bring me here? I cannot bear these close eternal streets.  We came from a quiet part.  Why did you force me to leave it?', 'Because I must have that dream I told you of, no more, and we must live among poor people, or it will come again.  Dear grandfather, you are old and weak, I know; but look at me.  I never will complain if you will not, but I have some suffering indeed.', 'Ah! poor, houseless, wandering, motherless child! has all my agony of care brought her to this at last!  Was I a happy man once, and have I lost happiness and all I had, for this!', 'If we were in the country now, s comfort in that.  And here t blow in here--What', 'Speak again, do I know the voice?', 'No, we are strangers, and having no money for a night', 'How came you to think of resting there? Or how, do you come to want a place of rest at this time of night?', 'Our misfortunes, are the cause.', 'Do you know, how wet she is, and that the damp streets are not a place for her?', 'I know it well, God help me, What can I do!', 'It  said the man.  ', 'This is the place, Don s nobody here will harm you.', 'I feared you were ill, The other men are all in motion, and you are so very quiet.', 'They leave me to myself, They know my humour.  They laugh at me, but don s my friend.', 'The fire?', 'It has been alive as long as I have, We talk and think together all night long.', 'It  he said-- s music, for I should know its voice among a thousand, and there are other voices in its roar.  It has its pictures too.  You don s my memory, that fire, and shows me all my life.', 'Yes, it was the same when I was quite a baby, and crawled about it, till I fell asleep.  My father watched it then.', 'Had you no mother?', 'No, she was dead.  Women work hard in these parts.  She worked herself to death they told me, and, as they said so then, the fire has gone on saying the same thing ever since.  I suppose it was true.  I have always believed it.', 'Were you brought up here, then?', 'Summer and winter, Secretly at first, but when they found it out, they let him keep me here.  So the fire nursed me--the same fire.  It has never gone out.', 'You are fond of it?', 'Of course I am.  He died before it.  I saw him fall down--just there, where those ashes are burning now--and wondered, I remember, why it didn', 'Have you been here ever since?', 'Ever since I came to watch it; but there was a while between, and a very cold dreary while it was.  It burned all the time though, and roared and leaped when I came back, as it used to do in our play days. You may guess, from looking at me, what kind of child I was, but for all the difference between us I was a child, and when I saw you in the street to-night, you put me in mind of myself, as I was after he died, and made me wish to bring you to the fire.  I thought of those old times again, when I saw you sleeping by it.  You should be sleeping now.  Lie down again, poor child, lie down again!', 'I know little of the country, for such as I, pass all our lives before our furnace doors, and seldom go forth to breathe.  But there are such places yonder.', 'And far from here?', 'Aye surely.  How could they be near us, and be green and fresh?  The road lies, too, through miles and miles, all lighted up by fires like ours--a strange black road, and one that would frighten you by night.', 'We are here and must go on,', 'Rough people--paths never made for little feet like yours--a dismal blighted way--is there no turning back, my child?', 'There is none, If you can direct us, do.  If not, pray do not seek to turn us from our purpose.  Indeed you do not know the danger that we shun, and how right and true we are in flying from it, or you would not try to stop us, I am sure you would not.', 'God forbid, if it is so! I', 'Two days and nights! He said two days and nights we should have to spend among such scenes as these.  Oh! if we live to reach the country once again, if we get clear of these dreadful places, though it is only to lie down and die, with what a grateful heart I shall thank God for so much mercy!', 'We shall be very slow to-day, dear, my feet are sore, and I have pains in all my limbs from the wet of yesterday.  I saw that he looked at us and thought of that, when he said how long we should be upon the road.', 'It was a dreary way he told us of, Is there no other road?  Will you not let me go some other way than this?', 'Places lie beyond these, where we may live in peace, and be tempted to do no harm.  We will take the road that promises to have that end, and we would not turn out of it, if it were a hundred times worse than our fears lead us to expect.  We would not, dear, would we?', 'No, No.  Let us go on.  I am ready.  I am quite ready, Nell.', 'What would you have here?', 'Charity.  A morsel of bread.', 'Do you see that? That', 'Here, woman, here', 'And won  said the other woman, hastily rising and confronting him.   t you give me back MY son, Sir, who was transported for the same offence!', 'Was he deaf and dumb, woman?', 'Was he not, Sir?', 'You know he was not.', 'He was, He was deaf, dumb, and blind, to all that was good and right, from his cradle.  Her boy may have learnt no better! where did mine learn better?  where could he?  who was there to teach him better, or where was it to be learnt?', 'Peace, woman, your boy was in possession of all his senses.', 'He was, and he was the more easy to be led astray because he had them.  If you save this boy because he may not know right from wrong, why did you not save mine who was never taught the difference?  You gentlemen have as good a right to punish her boy, that God has kept in ignorance of sound and speech, as you have to punish mine, that you kept in ignorance yourselves.  How many of the girls and boys--ah, men and women too--that are brought before you and you don', 'You are desperate, and I am sorry for you.', 'I AM desperate, and you have made me so.  Give me back my son, to work for these helpless children.  Be a just man, Sir, and, as you have had mercy upon this boy, give me back my son!', 'She is quite exhausted, You have taxed her powers too far, friend.', 'She is perishing of want, I never thought how weak and ill she was, till now.', 'I should give her, a tea-spoonful, every now and then, of hot brandy and water.', 'Why, that ve done, sir!', 'I should also, I should also, put her feet in hot water, and wrap them up in flannel.  I should likewise, give her something light for supper--the wing of a roasted fowl now--', 'Why, goodness gracious me, sir, it', 'You may then, give her a glass of hot mulled port wine, if she likes wine--', 'And a toast, Sir?', 'Ay, And a toast--of bread.  But be very particular to make it of bread, if you please, ma', 'I assure you, my good lady, that I have told you the plain truth.  As I hope to be saved, I have told you the truth.', 'Why then, I do believe you are in earnest, and I s the fact.', 'You should question me for half-a-dozen hours at a sitting, and welcome, and I would answer you patiently for the kindness of heart you have shown to-night, if I could, As it is, please to take care of her in the morning, and let me know early how she is; and to understand that I am paymaster for the three.', 'It makes me unhappy even in the midst of all this kindness to think that we should be a burden upon you.  How can I ever thank you?  If I had not met you so far from home, I must have died, and he would have been left alone.', 'We  said the schoolmaster; ', 'Indeed!', 'Oh yes, I have been appointed clerk and schoolmaster to a village a long way from here--and a long way from the old one as you may suppose--at five-and-thirty pounds a year. Five-and-thirty pounds!', 'I am very glad, so very, very glad.', 'I am on my way there now, They allowed me the stage-coach-hire--outside stage-coach-hire all the way.  Bless you, they grudge me nothing.  But as the time at which I am expected there, left me ample leisure, I determined to walk instead.  How glad I am, to think I did so!', 'How glad should we be!', 'Yes, yes, certainly, that  he added, looking upwards, ', 'certainly, that  he added, looking upwards, ', 'See--here  cried the delighted schoolmaster in a low voice;  ll be sworn.  Five-and-thirty pounds a-year in this beautiful place!', 'I must leave you somewhere for a few minutes, I have a letter to present, and inquiries to make, you know.  Where shall I take you?  To the little inn yonder?', 'Let us wait here, The gate is open.  We will sit in the church porch till you come back.', 'A good place too, Be sure that I come back with good news, and am not long gone!', 'Are you comfortable?', 'Quite, Sir, thank you.', 'Are you sure?  An', 'It is a little chilly, Sir,', 'I knew it! She wants some brandy and water!  Of course she does.  How could I forget it?  Hallo!  Stop at the next inn, and call out for a glass of hot brandy and water.', 'You  said the single gentleman, who did nothing himself but walk about the room.   s the matter with you, ma re faint.', 'Thank you, sir, I', 'I know you are.  I s notice, and she goes on getting fainter and fainter before my eyes.  I am?', 'Two, sir, besides Kit.', 'Boys, ma', 'Yes, sir.', 'Are they christened?', 'Only half baptised as yet, sir.', 'I em.  Remember that, if you please, ma', 'I couldn', 'You must, I see you want it.  I ought to have thought of it before.', 'This is the place! Drive to the wax-work!', 'Drive to the wax-work!', 'What  said the single gentleman thrusting out his head.  ', 'A wedding Sir, a wedding! Hurrah!', 'The world has gone mad, I think, Stand back here, will you, and let me knock.', 'Now, sir, what do you want!', 'Who has been married here, my friend?', 'I have.', 'You! and to whom in the devil', 'What right have you to ask?', 'What right! s mother more tightly through his own, for that good woman evidently had it in contemplation to run away.   t be.  Where is the child you have here, my good fellow.  You call her Nell.  Where is she?', 'Where is she! What news have you brought me?  What has become of her?', 'I ask YOU where she is?  What do you mean?', 'Oh sir! If you have come here to do her any good, why weren', 'She is not--not dead?', 'No, not so bad as that.', 'I thank God! Let me come in.', 'You see in me, good people, one to whom life itself is not dearer than the two persons whom I seek.  They would not know me.  My features are strange to them, but if they or either of them are here, take this good woman with you, and let them see her first, for her they both know.  If you deny them from any mistaken regard or fear for them, judge of my intentions by their recognition of this person as their old humble friend.', 'I always said it! I knew she was not a common child!  Alas, sir! we have no power to help you, for all that we could do, has been tried in vain.', 'Where shall we drive you, sir?', 'You may drive me, to the-- inn,', 'Any room will do, Let it be near at hand, that', 'Close here, sir, if you please to walk this way.', 'Would the gentleman like this room? He s as welcome as flowers in May, or coals at Christmas.  Would you like this room, sir? Honour me by walking in.  Do me the favour, pray.', 'Goodness gracious me! s mother, falling back in extreme surprise, ', 'Would you do me the honour?', 'I prefer being alone,', 'Oh!', 'Why it was only last night, sir, s mother, ', 'Indeed! When did that person come here, waiter?', 'Come down by the night-coach, this morning, sir.', 'Humph!  And when is he going?', 'Can', 'Beg him to walk this way, I should be glad to exchange a word with him, tell him.  Beg him to come at once, do you hear?', 'Your servant, sir, I encountered your messenger half-way.  I thought you re well.  I hope you', 'Christopher  he cried.   s mother?  Have change of air and scene improved her?  Her little family too, and Christopher?  Do they thrive?  Do they flourish?  Are they growing into worthy citizens, eh?', 'Mr Quilp,', 'We two have met before--', 'Surely, Oh surely, sir.  Such an honour and pleasure--it s mother, it', 'You may remember that the day I arrived in London, and found the house to which I drove, empty and deserted, I was directed by some of the neighbours to you, and waited upon you without stopping for rest or refreshment?', 'How precipitate that was, and yet what an earnest and vigorous measure!', 'I found, you most unaccountably, in possession of everything that had so recently belonged to another man, and that other man, who up to the time of your entering upon his property had been looked upon as affluent, reduced to sudden beggary, and driven from house and home.', 'We had warrant for what we did, my good sir, we had our warrant.  Don', 'No matter, He was gone.', 'Yes, he was gone, No doubt he was gone.  The only question was, where.  And it', 'No doubt he was gone.  The only question was, where.  And it', 'Now, what am I to think, of you, who, plainly indisposed to give me any information then--nay, obviously holding back, and sheltering yourself with all kinds of cunning, trickery, and evasion--are dogging my footsteps now?', 'I dogging!', 'Why, are you not? Were you not a few hours since, sixty miles off, and in the chapel to which this good woman goes to say her prayers?', 'She was there too, I think? I might say, if I was inclined to be rude, how do I know but you are dogging MY footsteps.  Yes, I was at chapel.  What then?  I s the last thing I do on such occasions, indeed.', 'In the name of all that  said the unfortunate single gentleman,  t you know with what object I have come here, and if you do know, can you throw no light upon it?', 'You think I  replied Quilp, shrugging up his shoulders.  ', 'Ah! we have said all we need say, I see, Pray leave us, if you please.', 'Willingly, Most willingly.  Christopher', 'Oho! Oho!  Are you there, my friend? In-deed!', 'You are there, are you, my friend? I am suspected and thrown aside, and Kit  he continued, after a thoughtful pause,  s a golden opportunity, not to be lost.  Let us find them first, and I  said the dwarf, throwing off a bumper of brandy, and smacking his lips,  em every one!', 'How are you, Christopher? All right, Christopher.  Mother', 'Why, how did he come here, mother?', 'I don  rejoined Mrs Nubbles, dismounting with her son but he has been a terrifying of me out of my seven senses all this blessed day.', 'He has?', 'You wouldn t, but don t believe he t turn round as if I was talking of him, but he', 'Oh, he  cried Mrs Nubbles.   t speak to him for the world.', 'Yes I will, mother.  What nonsense.  I say, sir--', 'You let my mother alone, will you? How dare you tease a poor lone woman like her, making her miserable and melancholy as if she hadn t you ashamed of yourself, you little monster?', 'Monster! Ugliest dwarf that could be seen anywhere for a penny--monster--ah!', 'You show her any of your impudence again, and I tell you what, Mr Quilp, I won m sure we never interfered with you.  This isn ll oblige me (though I should be very sorry to do it, on account of your size) to beat you.', 'Ha! What m away!', 'A light in the passage, A very soft knock; and, by your leave, my lady, I may yet steal upon you unawares.  Soho!', 'You  whispered the boy.  ', 'Who  retorted Quilp in the same tone.   t speak above your breath, or I', 'Will you answer me? What', 'You won  replied the boy.   re--you', 'Dead! No.  Do they?  Do they really, you dog?', 'They think you re drowned, You was last seen on the brink of the wharf, and they think you tumbled over.  Ha ha!', 'Not a word, Not a sound, not so much as a creaking board, or a stumble against a cobweb. Drowned, eh, Mrs Quilp!  Drowned!', 'If I could poison that dear old lady  murmured Quilp,  d die happy.', 'I', 'Ah! Who knows but he may be looking down upon us now! Who knows but he may be surveying of us from--from somewheres or another, and contemplating us with a watchful eye!  Oh Lor!', 'I can almost fancy, that I see his eye glistening down at the very bottom of my liquor.  When shall we look upon his like again?  Never, never! --holding his tumbler before his eyes-- --gulping down its contents, and striking himself emphatically a little below the chest--', 'The search has been quite unsuccessful then?', 'Quite, master.  But I should say that if he turns up anywhere, he', 'Then we have nothing for it but resignation, nothing but resignation and expectation.  It would be a comfort to have his body; it would be a dreary comfort.', 'Oh, beyond a doubt, if we once had that, we should be quite sure.', 'With regard to the descriptive advertisement, It is a melancholy pleasure to recall his traits. Respecting his legs now--?', 'Crooked, certainly, Do you think they WERE crooked? I think I see them now coming up the street very wide apart, in nankeen', 'I think they were a little so,', 'Legs crooked, Large head, short body, legs crooked--', 'Very crooked,', 'We am, Let us not bear hard upon the weaknesses of the deceased.  He is gone, ma', 'I thought you wanted the truth, That', 'Bless your eyes, how I love you, There she goes again.  Nothing but punch!', 'This is an occupation, which seems to bring him before my eyes like the Ghost of Hamlet  said Mr Brass smiling fondly at the wall, ', 'You had better go on, sir,', 'True, ma  cried Mr Brass.   ll trouble you for a little more of that, ma', 'Flat,', 'Aquiline! Aquiline, you hag.  Do you see it?  Do you call this flat?  Do you?  Eh?', 'Oh capital, capital! Excellent!  How very good he is!  He', 'Excellent!  How very good he is!  He', 'Not yet, Sampson, Not just yet!', 'Oh very good indeed! Ha ha ha!  Oh exceedingly good!  There', 'Ha ha ha!  Oh exceedingly good!  There', 'Good night,', 'Good night, sir, good night, This is a joyful occasion indeed, extremely joyful. Ha ha ha! oh very rich, very rich indeed, remarkably so!', 'Have you been dragging the river all day, gentlemen?', 'And yesterday too, master.', 'Dear me, you', 'So you thought I was dead and gone, did you? You thought you were a widow, eh?  Ha, ha, ha, you jade.', 'Indeed, Quilp, I', 'Who doubts it! You very sorry! to be sure you are. Who doubts that you', 'I don  said his wife, ', 'How could you go away so long, without saying a word to me or letting me hear of you or know anything about you? How could you be so cruel, Quilp?', 'How could I be so cruel! cruel! Because I was in the humour.  I m going away again.', 'Not again!', 'Yes, again.  I m off directly.  I mean to go and live wherever the fancy seizes me--at the wharf--at the counting-house--and be a jolly bachelor.  You were a widow in anticipation.  Damme, I', 'You can', 'I tell you, that I ll have my bachelor t pounce in upon you at unseasonable hours again, for I s Tom Scott?', 'Here I am, master,', 'Wait there, you dog, to carry a bachelor', 'Snug! Beautifully snug!  Call me at eight, you dog.', 'I  said the dwarf, ogling the accommodations;  ll look out for one like Christopher, and poison him--ha, ha, ha!  Business though--business--we must be mindful of business in the midst of pleasure, and the time has flown this morning, I declare.', 'Dick, my pet, my pupil, the apple of my eye, hey, hey!', 'Oh you  returned Mr Swiveller; ', 'How  retorted Quilp.   s the cream of clerkship, eh?', 'Why, rather sour, sir, Beginning to border upon cheesiness, in fact.', 'What  said the dwarf, advancing.   s none like--" eh, Dick!', 'Certainly not, none like her.  She', 'You  said Quilp, drawing up a chair.   s the matter?', 'The law don  returned Dick.   t moist enough, and there', 'Bah! Where would you run to, Dick?', 'I don  returned Mr Swiveller.   s name was Dick.  I wish cats were scarcer.', 'Perhaps you --said Dick, at last turning to the dwarf.   re quite welcome to it.  You ought to be, for it', 'What do you mean?', 'What should you say this was?', 'It looks like bride-cake,', 'And whose should you say it was? Whose?', 'Not--', 'Yes, the same.  You needn s no such name now.  Her name is Cheggs now, Sophy Cheggs.  Yet loved I as man never loved that hadn', 'Now, I hope you  said Dick;  s satisfied.  You went partners in the mischief, and I hope you like it. This is the triumph I was to have, is it?  It t, but comes limping up behind to make out the figure.  But it s a crusher.', 'Ha! It will be our turn to giggle soon.  And that reminds me--you spoke of young Trent--where is he?', 'That  said the dwarf, ', 'Which friend?', 'In the first floor.', 'Yes?', 'Your friend in the first floor, Dick, may know him.', 'No, he don', 'Don  rejoined Quilp;  s fortune, and, through him, yours, eh?', 'Why, the fact is, you see, that they HAVE been brought together.', 'Have been! Through whose means?', 'Through whose means?', 'Through mine, Didn', 'You know you didn', 'I believe you  said Dick.   t, I recollect.  Oh yes, I brought  s suggestion.', 'And what came of it?', 'Why, instead of my friend t hint at our taking anything to drink; and--and in short rather turned us out of the room than otherwise.', 'That', 'So we remarked to each other at the time, but quite true.', 'Have been brought together, eh? My friend has stolen a march upon me.  It led him to nothing, and therefore is no great matter, save in the intention.  I t leave the law at present.  I s a good unconscious spy on Brass, and tells, in his cups, all that he sees and hears.  You ll remain the best friends in the world, with your good leave.', 'Oh, Quilp! How you frightened me!', 'I meant to, you jade, What do you want here? I t I?', 'Oh, please come home, do come home, we', 'Out of your anxiety, Yes, I know that--out of your anxiety for my death.  I shall come home when I please, I tell you.  I shall come home when I please, and go when I please.  I  the Wisp, now here, now there, dancing about you always, starting up when you least expect me, and keeping you in a constant state of restlessness and irritation.  Will you begone?', 'I tell you no, No.  If you dare to come here again unless you ll keep watch-dogs in the yard that ll have man-traps, cunningly altered and improved for catching women--I', 'Do forgive me.  Do come back,', 'No-o-o-o-o! Not till my own good time, and then I', 'return in an hour.', 'There  said the dwarf, knocking at the house-door.   ll do.', 'Eh?', 'I  said the dwarf, pushing past her into the office; ', 'and mind your master has it directly he comes home.', 'How are you?', 'Do they use you ill here?  is your mistress a Tartar?', 'Where do you come from?', 'I don', 'What', 'Nothing.', 'Nonsense! What does your mistress call you when she wants you?', 'A little devil,', 'But please will you leave a card or message?', 'You  said Quilp with a grin.  ', 'It', 'Cool?', 'N-not particularly so, I think, sir,', 'Perhaps a little damp and ague-ish?', 'Just damp enough to be cheerful, sir, Nothing more, sir, nothing more.', 'And Sally? Does she like it?', 'She  returned that strong-minded lady,  t bother.', 'Sweet Sally! Gentle, charming, overwhelming Sally.', 'He  soliloquised Mr Brass.   s quite a Troubadour, you know; quite a Troubadour!', 'A word, before we go farther.  Sally, hark', 'Business, Very private business.  Lay your heads together when you', 'Certainly, sir, I  added the lawyer, raising his eyes to the ceiling,  s a treat to have  t know any act of parliament that', 'I shall deprive you of a treat, Put up your book.  We don s a lad named Kit--', 'Kit! Kit!  Ha! I t exactly call to mind--I don', 'You', 'He  cried the obsequious Sampson.  ', 'Don s have any wrangling, I s enough.', 'I s enough.', 'She  said the dwarf, patting her on the back and looking contemptuously at Sampson.   t like Kit, Sally.', 'Nor I,', 'Nor I,', 'Why, that  cried Quilp.  ', 'Fearfully eloquent! Quite appalling!', 'Come to the point, and don', 'Right again! always foremost!  I say, Sally, he is a yelping, insolent dog to all besides, and most of all, to me.  In short, I owe him a grudge. That', 'That', 'No, it  sneered Quilp; ', 'It shall, sir,', 'Then give me your hand, Sally, girl, yours.  I rely as much, or more, on you than him.  Tom Scott comes back.  Lantern, pipes, more grog, and a jolly night of it!', 'You see those two old houses,', 'Yes, surely, I have been looking at them nearly all the time you have been away.', 'And you would have looked at them more curiously yet, if you could have guessed what I have to tell you, One of those houses is mine.', 'It is a very beautiful place!', 'I almost feared you thought otherwise, You shivered when we first came in, as if you felt it cold or gloomy.', 'You shivered when we first came in, as if you felt it cold or gloomy.', 'It was not that, Indeed I cannot tell you what it was, but when I saw the outside, from the church porch, the same feeling came over me.  It is its being so old and grey perhaps.', 'Indeed I cannot tell you what it was, but when I saw the outside, from the church porch, the same feeling came over me.  It is its being so old and grey perhaps.', 'A peaceful place to live in, don', 'Oh yes, A quiet, happy place--a place to live and learn to die in!', 'A place to live, and learn to live, and gather health of mind and body in, for this old house is yours.', 'Ours!', 'Ay, for many a merry year to come, I hope.  I shall be a close neighbour--only next door--but this house is yours.', 'There  said the schoolmaster.  ', 'Heaven bless and prosper you!', 'Amen, my dear, and all of us, as it will, and has, in leading us through sorrow and trouble to this tranquil life.  But we must look at MY house now.  Come!', 'Well, well, Let it be as you desire.  She is very young.', 'Old in adversity and trial, sir,', 'God help her.  Let her rest, and forget them, But an old church is a dull and gloomy place for one so young as you, my child.', 'But an old church is a dull and gloomy place for one so young as you, my child.', 'Oh no, sir, I have no such thoughts, indeed.', 'I would rather see her dancing on the green at nights, than have her sitting in the shadow of our mouldering arches.  You must look to this, and see that her heart does not grow heavy among these solemn ruins.  Your request is granted, friend.', 'You are Mr Marton, the new schoolmaster?', 'I am, sir.', 'You come well recommended, and I am glad to see you.  I should have been in the way yesterday, expecting you, but I rode across the country to carry a message from a sick mother to her daughter in service some miles off, and have but just now returned.  This is our young church-keeper?  You are not the less welcome, friend, for her sake, or for this old man  ', 'She has been ill, sir, very lately,', 'Yes, yes.  I know she has, There have been suffering and heartache here.', 'Indeed there have, sir.', 'You will be happier here, we will try, at least, to make you so.  You have made great improvements here already.  Are they the work of your hands?', 'Yes, sir.', 'We may make some others--not better in themselves, but with better means perhaps, Let us see now, let us see.', 'As good a set of fellows, Marton, as you  he said, turning to the schoolmaster when the boy was gone;  t let  t do, at all.', 'This first boy, schoolmaster, is John Owen; a lad of good parts, sir, and frank, honest temper; but too thoughtless, too playful, too light-headed by far.  That boy, my good sir, would break his neck with pleasure, and deprive his parents of their chief comfort--and between ourselves, when you come to see him at hare and hounds, taking the fence and ditch by the finger-post, and sliding down the face of the little quarry, you s beautiful!', 'Now, look at that lad, sir, You see that fellow? Richard Evans his name is, sir.  An amazing boy to learn, blessed with a good memory, and a ready understanding, and moreover with a good voice and ear for psalm-singing, in which he is the best among us. Yet, sir, that boy will come to a bad end; he s always falling asleep in sermon-time--and to tell you the truth, Mr Marton, I always did the same at his age, and feel quite certain that it was natural to my constitution and I couldn', 'But if we talk of examples to be shunned, if we come to boys that should be a warning and a beacon to all their fellows, here t spare him.  This is the lad, sir; this one with the blue eyes and light hair.  This is a swimmer, sir, this fellow--a diver, Lord save us!  This is a boy, sir, who had a fancy for plunging into eighteen feet of water, with his clothes on, and bringing up a blind man  added the bachelor, in his peculiar whisper,  t the least idea that it came from me.', 'directly I heard of it; but never mention it on any account, for he hasn', 'You are better?', 'Ay surely, I', '_You_ will be quite well soon.', 'With Heaven', 'It is but one room you see.  There is another up above, but the stair has got harder to climb o m thinking of taking to it again, next summer, though.', 'I warrant now, that you think all those are used in making graves.', 'Indeed, I wondered that you wanted so many.', 'And well you might.  I am a gardener.  I dig the ground, and plant things that are to live and grow.  My works don', 'The very old one--so notched and worn?  Yes.', 'That s spade, and it re healthy people here, but it has done a power of work.  If it could speak now, that spade, it would tell you of many an unexpected job that it and I have done together; but I forget  s a poor one.--That  he added hastily.  ', 'There are flowers and shrubs to speak to your other work,', 'Oh yes.  And tall trees.  But they are not so separate from the sexton', 'No!', 'Not in my mind, and recollection--such as it is, Indeed they often help it.  For say that I planted such a tree for such a man.  There it stands, to remind me that he died.  When I look at its broad shadow, and remember what it was in his time, it helps me to the age of my other work, and I can tell you pretty nearly when I made his grave.', 'Indeed they often help it.  For say that I planted such a tree for such a man.  There it stands, to remind me that he died.  When I look at its broad shadow, and remember what it was in his time, it helps me to the age of my other work, and I can tell you pretty nearly when I made his grave.', 'But it may remind you of one who is still alive,', 'Of twenty that are dead, in connexion with that one who lives, then, wife, husband, parents, brothers, sisters, children, friends--a score at least.  So it happens that the sexton', 'Ah! People never learn.  They never learn.  It', 'I am going there now,', 'There  said the sexton,   time, the water fell again, and a third knot was made.  In ten years more, the well dried up; and now, if you lower the bucket till your arms are tired, and let out nearly all the cord, you', 'A dreadful place to come on in the dark!', 'What is it but a grave! What else!  And which of our old folks, knowing all this, thought, as the spring subsided, of their own failing strength, and lessening life?  Not one!', 'Are you very old yourself?', 'I shall be seventy-nine--next summer.', 'You still work when you are well?', 'Work!  To be sure.  You shall see my gardens hereabout.  Look at the window there.  I made, and have kept, that plot of ground entirely with my own hands.  By this time next year I shall hardly see the sky, the boughs will have grown so thick.  I have my winter work at night besides.', 'Some gentlefolks who are fond of ancient days, and what belongs to them, like to buy these keepsakes from our church and ruins. Sometimes, I make them of scraps of oak, that turn up here and there; sometimes of bits of coffins which the vaults have long preserved.  See here--this is a little chest of the last kind, clasped at the edges with fragments of brass plates that had writing on  t many by me at this time of year, but these shelves will be full--next summer.', 'I  said the child when she approached.  ', 'She lived in another hamlet, my dear, Three mile away.', 'Was she young?', 'Ye-yes', 'What', 'How old was Becky Morgan?', 'Becky Morgan?', 'Yes, t hear,  re getting very deaf, Davy, very deaf to be sure!', 'Let me think I saw last night what they had put upon the coffin--was it seventy-nine?', 'No, no,', 'Ah yes, it was though, For I remember thinking she was very near our age.  Yes, it was seventy-nine.', 'Are you sure you didn', 'What? Say that again.', 'He s very deaf indeed, are you sure you', 'are you sure you', 'Oh quite, Why not?', 'He  muttered the sexton to himself.   s getting foolish.', 'You were telling me, about your gardening.  Do you ever plant things here?', 'In the churchyard? Not I.', 'I have seen some flowers and little shrubs about, there are some over there, you see.  I thought they were of your rearing, though indeed they grow but poorly.', 'there are some over there, you see.  I thought they were of your rearing, though indeed they grow but poorly.', 'They grow as Heaven wills, and it kindly ordains that they shall never flourish here.', 'I do not understand you.', 'Why, this it is, They mark the graves of those who had very tender, loving friends.', 'I was sure they did! I am very glad to know they do!', 'Aye, but stay.  Look at them.  See how they hang their heads, and droop, and wither.  Do you guess the reason?', 'No,', 'Because the memory of those who lie below, passes away so soon.  At first they tend them, morning, noon, and night; they soon begin to come less frequently; from once a day, to once a week; from once a week to once a month; then, at long and uncertain intervals; then, not at all. Such tokens seldom flourish long.  I have known the briefest summer flowers outlive them.', 'I grieve to hear it,', 'Ah! so say the gentlefolks who come down here to look about them, but I say otherwise.  "It s melancholy to see these things all withering or dead." I crave their pardon and tell them that, as I take it,  s nature.', 'Perhaps the mourners learn to look to the blue sky by day, and to the stars by night, and to think that the dead are there, and not in graves,', 'Perhaps so, It may be.', 'Whether it be as I believe it is, or no, I', 'Did you call?', 'I have been thinking, Davy, that she, must have been a deal older than you or me.', 'Seventy-nine, I tell you that I saw it.', 'Saw it? aye, but, Davy, women don', 'That  said the other old man, with a sudden sparkle in his eye.  ', 'I', 'She did look old, You', 'Call to mind how old she looked for many a long, long year, and say if she could be but seventy-nine at last--only our age,', 'Five year older at the very least!', 'Five! Ten.  Good eighty-nine.  I call to mind the time her daughter died.  She was eighty-nine if she was a day, and tries to pass upon us now, for ten year younger.  Oh!  human vanity!', 'It', 'What?', 'He  cried the sexton.  ', 'Ah! He', 'Nell here? It does me good to see you in the air and light.  I feared you were again in the church, where you so often are.', 'Feared! Is it not a good place?', 'Yes, yes, But you must be gay sometimes--nay, don', 'Not sadly, if you knew my heart.  Do not look at me as if you thought me sorrowful.  There is not a happier creature on earth, than I am now.', 'What?', 'All this, all this about us.  But which of us is sad now?  You see that I am smiling.', 'And so am I, smiling to think how often we shall laugh in this same place.  Were you not talking yonder?', 'Yes,', 'Of something that has made you sorrowful?', 'What was it? Come.  Tell me what it was.', 'I rather grieve--I _do_ rather grieve to think, that those who die about us, are so soon forgotten.', 'And do you think, that an unvisited grave, a withered tree, a faded flower or two, are tokens of forgetfulness or cold neglect?  Do you think there are no deeds, far away from here, in which these dead may be best remembered?  Nell, Nell, there may be people busy in the world, at this instant, in whose good actions and good thoughts these very graves--neglected as they look to us--are the chief instruments.', 'Tell me no more, Tell me no more.  I feel, I know it.  How could I be unmindful of it, when I thought of you?', 'There is nothing, no, nothing innocent or good, that dies, and is forgotten.  Let us hold to that faith, or none.  An infant, a prattling child, dying in its cradle, will live again in the better thoughts of those who loved it, and will play its part, through them, in the redeeming actions of the world, though its body be burnt to ashes or drowned in the deepest sea.  There is not an angel added to the Host of Heaven but does its blessed work on earth in those that loved it here.  Forgotten! oh, if the good deeds of human creatures could be traced to their source, how beautiful would even death appear; for how much charity, mercy, and purified affection, would be seen to have their growth in dusty graves!', 'Yes, it is the truth; I know it is.  Who should feel its force so much as I, in whom your little scholar lives again!  Dear, dear, good friend, if you knew the comfort you have given me!', 'A good man, a kind man. Surely he will never harm us, Nell.  We are safe here, at last, eh?  We will never go away from here?', 'She needs rest, too pale--too pale.  She is not like what she was.', 'When?', 'Ha! to be sure--when?  How many weeks ago?  Could I count them on my fingers?  Let them rest though; they', 'Much better, dear, We will forget them; or, if we ever call them to mind, it shall be only as some uneasy dream that has passed away.', 'Hush! no more talk of the dream, and all the miseries it brought.  There are no dreams here.  ', 'Thank Heaven! for this most happy change!', 'I will be patient, humble, very thankful, and obedient, if you will let me stay.  But do not hide from me; do not steal away alone; let me keep beside you.  Indeed, I will be very true and faithful, Nell.', 'I steal away alone! why that, would be a pleasant jest indeed.  See here, dear grandfather, we ll begin, and work together, side by side.', 'would be a pleasant jest indeed.  See here, dear grandfather, we ll begin, and work together, side by side.', 'It is a brave thought! Mind, darling--we begin to-morrow!', 'A kind office, Have you done all that, this morning?', 'It is very little, sir, to what we mean to do.', 'Good work, good work, But do you only labour at the graves of children, and young people?', 'We shall come to the others in good time, sir,', 'What now? What is the matter?', 'She is not one yet! No, no.  Not yet.', 'No, no.  Not yet.', 'You must not be one, dear Nell, We can', 'I do not understand you, Tell me what you mean.', 'Why, they say, t be, will you?  Don', 'She cannot bear the thought! You will not go.  You know how sorry we should be.  Dear Nell, tell me that you', 'Only look at me, Nell, and tell me that you t you say yes, Nell?', 'After a time, the kind angels will be glad to think that you are not among them, and that you stayed here to be with us.  Willy went away, to join them; but if he had known how I should miss him in our little bed at night, he never would have left me, I am sure.', 'And a good little friend he is, too, When his elder brother died--elder seems a strange word, for he was only seven years old--I remember this one took it sorely to heart.', 'When his elder brother died--elder seems a strange word, for he was only seven years old--I remember this one took it sorely to heart.', 'It has given him something of a quiet way, I think, though for that he is merry enough at times.  I', 'though for that he is merry enough at times.  I', 'Indeed we have not, I have been afraid to go near it; for I am not often down in that part of the church, and do not know the ground.', 'Come down with me, I have known it from a boy. Come!', 'This is the place, Give me your hand while you throw back the cover, lest you should stumble and fall in.  I am too old--I mean rheumatic--to stoop, myself.', 'A black and dreadful place!', 'Look in,', 'It looks like a grave itself,', 'It does,', 'I have often had the fancy, that it might have been dug at first to make the old place more gloomy, and the old monks more religious.  It', 'We shall see, on what gay heads other earth will have closed, when the light is shut out from here.  God knows!  They', 'The birds sing again in spring, Spring! a beautiful and happy time!', 'It has always been the same with me, always.  s hour I twas the first to fade away; I never nursed a dear Gazelle, to glad me with its soft black eye, but when it came to know me well, and love me, it was sure to marry a market-gardener.', 'Twas ever thus--from childhood ve seen my fondest hopes decay, I never loved a tree or flower but ', 'And this, is life, I believe.  Oh, certainly.  Why not!  I  added Richard, taking off his hat again and looking hard at it, as if he were only deterred by pecuniary considerations from spurning it with his foot,  s perfidy, in remembrance of her with whom I shall never again thread the windings of the mazy; whom I shall never more pledge in the rosy; who, during the short remainder of my existence, will murder the balmy.  Ha, ha, ha!', 'You', 'Rather,', 'Rather! I should think so.  Why, my good feller, do you know what o', 'Won  said Dick.   Tis now the witching--"', '"Hour of night!"', '"When churchyards yawn,"', '"And graves give up their dead."', 'Well, and how are you my buck? I was forced to come into the City upon some little private matters of my own, and couldn t expect to find you.  It is so everlastingly early.', 'And what', 'The town  replied Mr Chuckster,  s no news.  By-the-bye, that lodger of yours is a most extraordinary person.  He quite eludes the most vigorous comprehension, you know.  Never was such a feller!', 'What has he been doing now?', 'By Jove, Sir, s head curiously carved in brass,  s no harm in him, but he is so amazingly slow and soft.  Now, if he wanted a friend, why couldn', 'No, no,', 'Oh yes I have, I have my faults, no man knows his faults better than I know mine.  But, I t more of these qualities that commonly endear man to man, than our articled clerk has, I d die degraded, as I had lived.  I would upon my honour.', 'Not contented, Sir, with making friends with Abel, he has cultivated the acquaintance of his father and mother. Since he came home from that wild-goose chase, he has been there-- actually been there.  He patronises young Snobby besides; you ll be constantly coming backwards and forwards to this place: yet I don  said Mr Chuckster, shaking his head gravely, as men are wont to do when they consider things are going a little too far,  t feel for the governor, and know that he could never get on without me, I should be obliged to cut the connection.  I should have no alternative.', 'As to young Snob, sir, you ll turn out bad.  In our profession we know something of human nature, and take my word for it, that the feller that came back to work out that shilling, will show himself one of these days in his true colours.  He', 'you ll turn out bad.  In our profession we know something of human nature, and take my word for it, that the feller that came back to work out that shilling, will show himself one of these days in his true colours.  He', 'Is the gentleman at home?', 'I mean the gentleman up-stairs, Is he at home?', 'Why?', 'Because if he is, I have a letter for him.', 'From whom?', 'From Mr Garland.', 'Oh! Then you may hand it over, Sir.  And if you', 'Thank you, But I am to give it to himself, if you please.', 'Didn', 'Yes, Sir, Certainly, Sir.', 'Then where is he?', 'He  rejoined Mr Swiveller.   t you hear you', 'Didn  said Mr Chuckster.  ', 'Well, Mr Richard, How are we this morning?  Are we pretty fresh and cheerful sir--eh, Mr Richard?', 'Pretty well, sir,', 'That  said Brass.   s a pleasant world we live in sir, a very pleasant world.  There are bad people in it, Mr Richard, but if there were no bad people, there would be no good lawyers.  Ha ha!  Any letters by the post this morning, Mr Richard?', 'Ha! no matter.  If there ll be more to-morrow.  A contented spirit, Mr Richard, is the sweetness of existence.  Anybody been here, sir?', 'Only my friend May we ne', 'Friend, or a bottle to give him.  Ha ha! That t it?  A very good song, Mr Richard, very good.  I like the sentiment of it.  Ha ha!  Your friend s office I think--yes--May we ne', 'Only somebody to the lodger,', 'Oh indeed! Somebody to the lodger eh?  Ha ha!  May we ne', 'Yes, With him now.', 'With him now! Ha ha!  There let ', 'Oh certainly,', 'And who, who is the lodger', 'Another young man, who belongs to Witherden  returned Richard.  ', 'Kit, eh! Strange name--name of a dancing-master s there, is he?  Oh!', 'Will you have the goodness, Mr Richard, just to step over to Peckham Rye with that?  There s rather particular and should go by hand.  Charge the office with your coach-hire back, you know; don s motto--Eh, Mr Richard?  Ha ha!', 'Kit, how do you do?', 'You are not to go, if you please, Kit, You are to step in here, if you please.  Dear me, dear me!  When I look at you, I am reminded of the sweetest little face that ever my eyes beheld.  I remember your coming there, twice or thrice, when we were in possession.  Ah Kit, my dear fellow, gentleman in my profession have such painful duties to perform sometimes, that you needn t indeed!', 'I don  said Kit,  t for the like of me to judge.', 'Our only consolation, Kit, is, that although we cannot turn away the wind, we can soften it; we can temper it, if I may say so, to the shorn lambs.', 'Shorn indeed! Pretty close!', 'On that occasion, Kit, on that occasion that I have just alluded to, I had a hard battle with Mr Quilp (for Mr Quilp is a very hard man) to obtain them the indulgence they had.  It might have cost me a client.  But suffering virtue inspired me, and I prevailed.', 'He', 'I respect you, Kit, I saw enough of your conduct, at that time, to respect you, though your station is humble, and your fortune lowly.  It isn', 'Well, well, this is wide of the bull re to take that, if you please.', 'this is wide of the bull re to take that, if you please.', 'For yourself, From--', 'No matter about the person they came from, Say me, if you like.  We have eccentric friends overhead, Kit, and we mustn re to take them, that t think they ll have to take from the same place.  I hope not.  Good bye, Kit.  Good bye!', 'May I come in?', 'Oh yes, you may come in,', 'Ahem!', 'Why, yes, I should say as good as done.', 'Ha ha! Here', 'The old gentleman again! a very prepossessing old gentleman, Mr Richard--charming countenance, sir--extremely calm--benevolence in every feature, sir.  He quite realises my idea of King Lear, as he appeared when in possession of his kingdom, Mr Richard--the same good humour, the same white hair and partial baldness, the same liability to be imposed upon.  Ah!  A sweet subject for contemplation, sir, very sweet!', 'Admirably groomed, Kit does you great credit--amazingly sleek and bright to be sure.  He literally looks as if he had been varnished all over.', 'A beautiful animal indeed! Sagacious too?', 'Bless you! he knows what you say to him as well as a Christian does.', 'Does he indeed! Dear me!', 'I little thought the first time I saw him, Sir, s strong interest in his favourite, ', 'Ah! A charming subject of reflection for you, very charming.  A subject of proper pride and congratulation, Christopher.  Honesty is the best policy.--I always find it so myself.  I lost forty-seven pound ten by being honest this morning.  But it s gain!', 'A charming subject of reflection for you, very charming.  A subject of proper pride and congratulation, Christopher.  Honesty is the best policy.--I always find it so myself.  I lost forty-seven pound ten by being honest this morning.  But it s gain!', 'A man, who loses forty-seven pound ten in one morning by his honesty, is a man to be envied.  If it had been eighty pound, the luxuriousness of feeling would have been increased.  Every pound lost, would have been a hundredweight of happiness gained.  The still small voice, Christopher, is a-singing comic songs within me, and all is happiness and joy!', 'Oh! I didn t, It t you tell upon me, please don', 'Tell upon you! Do you mean to say you were looking through the keyhole for company?', 'Yes, upon my word I was,', 'How long have you been cooling your eye there?', 'Oh ever since you first began to play them cards, and long before.', 'Well--come in Here--sit down, and I', 'Oh! I durstn  rejoined the small servant;  ud kill me, if she know', 'Have you got a fire down-stairs?', 'A very little one,', 'Miss Sally couldn d I went down there, so I  said Richard, putting the cards into his pocket.  ', 'It ain', 'Could you eat any bread and meat? Yes?  Ah! I thought so.  Did you ever taste beer?', 'Yes?  Ah! I thought so.  Did you ever taste beer?', 'I had a sip of it once,', 'Here  cried Mr Swiveller, raising his eyes to the ceiling.   t be tasted in a sip!  Why, how old are you?', 'I don', 'There! First of all clear that off, and then you s next.', 'Next, take a pull at that; but moderate your transports, you know, for you', 'Oh! isn', 'Now, those are the stakes.  If you win, you get  em.  To make it seem more real and pleasant, I shall call you the Marchioness, do you hear?', 'those are the stakes.  If you win, you get  em.  To make it seem more real and pleasant, I shall call you the Marchioness, do you hear?', 'em.  To make it seem more real and pleasant, I shall call you the Marchioness, do you hear?', 'Then, Marchioness, fire away!', 'With which object in view, Marchioness, I shall ask your ladyship am, on, while such purl on the bank still is growing, and such eyes light the waves as they run.  Marchioness, your health.  You will excuse my wearing my hat, but the palace is damp, and the marble floor is--if I may be allowed the expression--sloppy.', 'The Baron Sampsono Brasso and his fair sister are (you tell me) at the Play?', "Ha! 'Tis well. Marchioness!--but no matter.  Some wine there.  Ho!", 'Do they often go where glory waits ', 'Oh, yes; I believe you they do, Miss Sally', 'Such a what?', 'Such a one-er,', 'They sometimes go to see Mr Quilp, they go to a many places, bless you!', 'Is Mr Brass a wunner?', 'Not half what Miss Sally is, he isn  replied the small servant, shaking her head.   d never do anything without her.', 'Oh!  He wouldn t he?', 'Miss Sally keeps him in such order, he always asks her advice, he does; and he catches it sometimes.  Bless you, you wouldn', 'I suppose, that they consult together, a good deal, and talk about a great many people--about me for instance, sometimes, eh, Marchioness?', 'Complimentary?', 'Humph! Would it be any breach of confidence, Marchioness, to relate what they say of the humble individual who has now the honour to--?', 'Miss Sally says you', 'Well, Marchioness, that', 'But she says, that you an', 'Why, really Marchioness, several ladies and gentlemen--not exactly professional persons, but tradespeople, ma s a popular prejudice, Marchioness; and yet I am sure I don', 'Marchioness, the word of a gentleman is as good as his bond--sometimes better, as in the present case, where his bond might prove but a doubtful sort of security.  I am your friend, and I hope we shall play many more rubbers together in this same saloon.  But, Marchioness, it occurs to me that you must be in the constant habit of airing your eye at keyholes, to know all this.', 'I only wanted, to know where the key of the safe was hid; that was all; and I wouldn', 'You didn  said Dick.   t, or you', 'This Marchioness, is a very extraordinary person--surrounded by mysteries, ignorant of the taste of beer, unacquainted with her own name (which is less remarkable), and taking a limited view of society through the keyholes of doors--can these things be her destiny, or has some unknown person started an opposition to the decrees of fate?  It is a most inscrutable and unmitigated staggerer!', 'These rubbers, remind me of the matrimonial fireside.  Cheggs em now.  From sport to sport they hurry her to banish her regrets, and when they win a smile from her, they think that she forgets--but she don  added Richard, getting his left cheek into profile, and looking complacently at the reflection of a very little scrap of whisker in the looking-glass; ', 'I say you haven', 'I didn  rejoined Mr Swiveller.  ', 'No, but have you? Seriously, you know.', 'What a dull dog you must be to ask me such a question seriously, Haven', 'Well, all I know is, that it', 'Halloa! I hope the Marchioness hasn', 'There was a knife too, of the same pattern.  They were given to me by my father, years ago, and are both gone.  You haven', 'It  said Miss Brass, pulling out the tin box and refreshing herself with a pinch of snuff; ', 'You don  cried Dick.  ', 'It is so, and there can', 'Then by Jove, I am afraid the Marchioness is done for!', 'Mr Richard, sir, good morning!  Here we are again, sir, entering upon another day, with our bodies strengthened by slumber and breakfast, and our spirits fresh and flowing.  Here we are, Mr Richard, rising with the sun to run our little course--our course of duty, sir--and, like him, to get through our day', 'You  said Brass.  ', 'Dear me! you too!  Is anything the matter?  Mr Richard, sir--', 'This is a most extraordinary and painful circumstance--Mr Richard, sir, a most painful circumstance.  The fact is, that I myself have missed several small sums from the desk, of late, and have refrained from mentioning it, hoping that accident would discover the offender; but it has not done so--it has not done so.  Sally--Mr Richard, sir--this is a particularly distressing affair!', 'No, Mr Richard, sir, I will not take it up.  I will let it lie there, sir.  To take it up, Mr Richard, sir, would imply a doubt of you; and in you, sir, I have unlimited confidence.  We will let it lie there, Sir, if you please, and we will not take it up by any means.', 'Well, Go on, will you!', 'Why, hasn t that somebody been left alone in it sometimes--thanks to you; and do you mean to tell me that that somebody isn', 'What somebody?', 'Why, what do you call him--Kit.', 'Mr Garland', 'To be sure.', 'Never! Never.  I t tell me I', 'I say, that he', 'I say, that he is not.  What do you mean?  How dare you?  Are characters to be whispered away like this? Do you know that he', 'Is the gentleman up-stairs, sir, if you please?', 'Yes, Kit, Yes Kit, he is.  I am glad to see you Kit, I am rejoiced to see you.  Look in again, as you come down-stairs, Kit.  That lad a robber! with that frank and open countenance!  I s in Broad Street, and inquire if they have had instructions to appear in Carkem and Painter.  THAT lad a robber, Am I blind, deaf, silly; do I know nothing of human nature when I see it before me?  Kit a robber!  Bah!', 'Is anything the matter, sir?', 'Matter! No.  Why anything the matter?', 'You are so very pale, that I should hardly have known you.', 'Pooh pooh! mere fancy, Never better, Kit, never better in all my life.  Merry too.  Ha ha! How', 'Never better, Kit, never better in all my life.  Merry too.  Ha ha! How', 'A great deal better,', 'I  rejoined Brass;  s well I hope, Kit--and the pony--my friend, my particular friend you know.  Ha ha!', 'I have been thinking, Kit, that I could throw some little emoluments in your mother', 'Oh yes, Sir, yes certainly.', 'A widow, I think? an industrious widow?', 'A harder-working woman or a better mother never lived, Sir.', 'Ah! That', 'Thank you Sir, I must be going directly.', 'Put it down while you stay, at any rate, I was thinking, Kit, that we have often houses to let for people we are concerned for, and matters of that sort.  Now you know we em--very often undeserving people that we can s to prevent our having a person that we CAN depend upon, and enjoying the delight of doing a good action at the same time?  I say, what s lodging--and good lodging too--pretty well all the year round, rent free, and a weekly allowance besides, Kit, that would provide her with a great many comforts she don', 'em--very often undeserving people that we can s to prevent our having a person that we CAN depend upon, and enjoying the delight of doing a good action at the same time?  I say, what s lodging--and good lodging too--pretty well all the year round, rent free, and a weekly allowance besides, Kit, that would provide her with a great many comforts she don', 'How can I see any objection to such a kind offer, sir? I don t indeed.', 'Why then, s with such a repulsive smile that the latter, even in the very height of his gratitude, drew back, quite startled.   s done.', 'Done, I say, Ha ha! and so you shall find Kit, so you shall find.  But dear me, what a time Mr Richard is gone!  A sad loiterer to be sure!  Will you mind the office one minute, while I run up-stairs?  Only one minute.  I', 'Oh! There goes your pet, Sammy, eh?', 'Ah!  There he goes, My pet, if you please.  An honest fellow, Mr Richard, sir--a worthy fellow indeed!', 'Hem!', 'I tell you, you aggravating vagabond, that I d sooner suspect your honesty than his.', 'She drives me wild, Mr Richard, sir, she exasperates me beyond all bearing.  I am heated and excited, sir, I know I am.  These are not business manners, sir, nor business looks, but she carries me out of myself.', 'Why don', 'Because she can  retorted Brass;  t believe she  said Brass,  ve carried my point.  I', 'He has minded the office again, he has had my confidence, and he shall continue to have it; he--why, where', 'What have you lost?', 'Dear me! the note, Mr Richard, sir, the five-pound note--what can have become of it?  I laid it down here--God bless me!', 'What! Gone!  Now who s got it?  Never mind five pounds--what s honest, you know, quite honest.  It would be mean to suspect him. Don', 'Is it really gone though?', 'Upon my word, Mr Richard, Sir, I fear this is a black business.  It s to be done?', 'Don  said Miss Sally, taking more snuff.   t run after him on any account.  Give him time to get rid of it, you know. It would be cruel to find him out!', 'Stop! Not so fast sir.  You', 'Yes, I am,', 'I--I--can hardly believe it, but something of value is missing from the office.  I hope you don', 'Know what! good Heaven, Mr Brass! you don', 'No, no, I don t say I said you did.  You', 'Of course I will, Why not?', 'To be sure! Why not?  I hope there may turn out to be no why not.  If you knew the trouble I d be sorry for it.', 'And I am sure you  replied Kit.  ', 'Certainly! the quicker, the better.  Mr Richard--have the goodness, sir, to take that arm.  I s not easy walking three abreast, but under these circumstances it must be done, sir; there', 'Now, you know, if this is a case of innocence, it is a case of that description, Christopher, where the fullest disclosure is the best satisfaction for everybody.  Therefore if you  he demonstrated what kind of examination he meant by turning back the cuffs of his coat, ', 'Search me, But mind, sir--I know you', 'It is certainly a very painful occurrence, s pockets, and fished up a miscellaneous collection of small articles; ', 'Here', 'No harm in that sir, No harm in a handkerchief Sir, whatever. The faculty don s handkerchief in one', 'In the hat?', 'Under the handkerchief, and tucked beneath the lining,', 'And this, is the world that turns upon its own axis, and has Lunar influences, and revolutions round Heavenly Bodies, and various games of that sort!  This is human natur, is it!  Oh natur, natur!  This is the miscreant that I was going to benefit with all my little arts, and that, even now, I feel so much for, as to wish to let him go!  But, I am myself a lawyer, and bound to set an example in carrying the laws of my happy country into effect.  Sally my dear, forgive me, and catch hold of him on the other side.  Mr Richard, sir, have the goodness to run and fetch a constable.  The weakness is past and over sir, and moral strength returns.  A constable, sir, if you please!', 'We had better, get to the office while there', 'The lady, eh?', 'Ah! Yes--the lady.  Likewise the young man that found the property.', 'Mr Richard, Sir, A sad necessity. But the altar of our country sir--', 'You  interrupted the constable, holding Kit (whom his other captors had released) carelessly by the arm, a little above the elbow.  ', 'But, hear me speak a word, Hear me speak a word.  I am no more guilty than any one of you.  Upon my soul I am not.  I a thief!  Oh, Mr Brass, you know me better.  I am sure you know me better.  This is not right of you, indeed.', 'I give you my word, constable-- words be blowed;', 'Quite true, constable, Strictly correct.  I give you my oath, constable, that down to a few minutes ago, when this fatal discovery was made, I had such confidence in that lad, that I re very slow, Sir.', 'Strictly correct.  I give you my oath, constable, that down to a few minutes ago, when this fatal discovery was made, I had such confidence in that lad, that I re very slow, Sir.', 'Who is there that knows me, that would not trust me-- that does not? ask anybody whether they have ever doubted me; whether I have ever wronged them of a farthing.  Was I ever once dishonest when I was poor and hungry, and is it likely I would begin now!  Oh consider what you do.  How can I meet the kindest friends that ever human creature had, with this dreadful charge upon me!', 'And he can hardly believe it, either, nor nobody will.  I wish I could doubt the evidence of my senses, but their depositions are unimpeachable.  It  cried Sampson, winking and rubbing them,  ll be off.  A sad errand! a moral funeral, quite!', 'nor nobody will.  I wish I could doubt the evidence of my senses, but their depositions are unimpeachable.  It  cried Sampson, winking and rubbing them,  ll be off.  A sad errand! a moral funeral, quite!', 'Mr Brass, Do me one favour.  Take me to Mr Witherden', 'Do, My master s sake, take me there, first.', 'Well, I don  stammered Brass, who perhaps had his reasons for wishing to show as fair as possible in the eyes of the notary.  ', 'Aha! Where now, Brass? where now? Sally with you too? Sweet Sally!  And Dick?  Pleasant Dick!  And Kit! Honest Kit!', 'He  said Brass to the coachman.  ', 'Why not? Why not, you rogue of a lawyer, why not?', 'Bank-note lost in our office sir, Found in his hat sir--he previously left alone there--no mistake at all sir--chain of evidence complete--not a link wanting.', 'Found in his hat sir--he previously left alone there--no mistake at all sir--chain of evidence complete--not a link wanting.', 'What! Kit a thief!  Kit a thief!  Ha ha ha!  Why, he   And with that, he burst into a yell of laughter, manifestly to the great terror of the coachman, and pointed to a dyer', 'Is it coming to that, Kit! Ha ha ha ha!  What a disappointment for little Jacob, and for his darling mother!  Let him have the Bethel minister to comfort and console him, Brass.  Eh, Kit, eh?  Drive on coachey, drive on.  Bye bye, Kit; all good go with you; keep up your spirits; my love to the Garlands--the dear old lady and gentleman.  Say I inquired after  em, on you, and on everybody, Kit.  Blessings on all the world!', 'Sir, my name is Brass--Brass of Bevis Marks, Sir.  I have had the honour and pleasure, Sir, of being concerned against you in some little testamentary matters.  How do you do, sir?', 'My clerk will attend to any business you may have come upon, Mr Brass,', 'Thank you Sir, thank you, I am sure.  Allow me, Sir, to introduce my sister--quite one of us Sir, although of the weaker sex--of great use in my business Sir, I assure you.  Mr Richard, sir, have the goodness to come foward if you please--No really, really Sir, I must, under favour, request a word or two with you, indeed.', 'really Sir, I must, under favour, request a word or two with you, indeed.', 'Mr Brass, I am engaged.  You see that I am occupied with these gentlemen.  If you will communicate your business to Mr Chuckster yonder, you will receive every attention.', 'Gentlemen, Gentlemen, I appeal to you--really, gentlemen--consider, I beg of you.  I am of the law.  I am styled "gentleman" by Act of Parliament.  I maintain the title by the annual payment of twelve pound sterling for a certificate. I am not one of your players of music, stage actors, writers of books, or painters of pictures, who assume a station that the laws of their country don', 'Well, will you have the goodness to state your business then, Mr Brass?', 'Sir, I will.  Ah Mr Witherden! you little know the--but I will not be tempted to travel from the point, sir, I believe the name of one of these gentlemen is Garland.', 'Of both,', 'In-deed! But I might have known that, from the uncommon likeness.  Extremely happy, I am sure, to have the honour of an introduction to two such gentlemen, although the occasion is a most painful one.  One of you gentlemen has a servant called Kit?', 'Both,', 'Two Kits? Dear me!', 'One Kit, sir, who is employed by both gentlemen.  What of him?', 'This of him, sir, That young man, sir, that I have felt unbounded and unlimited confidence in, and always behaved to as if he was my equal--that young man has this morning committed a robbery in my office, and been taken almost in the fact.', 'That young man, sir, that I have felt unbounded and unlimited confidence in, and always behaved to as if he was my equal--that young man has this morning committed a robbery in my office, and been taken almost in the fact.', 'This must be some falsehood!', 'It is not possible,', 'I', 'Mr Witherden, sir, YOUR words are actionable, and if I was a man of low and mean standing, who couldn ever, sir, being what I am, I merely scorn such expressions.  The honest warmth of the other gentleman I respect, and I t have put myself in this painful position, I assure you, but that the lad himself desired to be brought here in the first instance, and I yielded to his prayers.  Mr Chuckster, sir, will you have the goodness to tap at the window for the constable that', 'Is it not possible, that this note may have found its way into the hat by some accident,--such as the removal of papers on the desk, for instance?', 'It  said Brass,  t quite follow that he took it.  The presumption re Christians, I hope?', 'I suppose, that no gentleman here can give evidence as to whether he', 'He has had money from time to time, certainly, But that, as he always told me, was given him by Mr Brass himself.', 'Yes to be sure, You can bear me out in that, Sir?', 'Eh?', 'The money you know, the half-crowns, that you gave me--from the lodger,', 'Oh dear me! This is a bad case, I find; a very bad case indeed.', 'This is a bad case, I find; a very bad case indeed.', 'What!  Did you give him no money on account of anybody, Sir?', 'I give him money, Sir! Oh, come you know, this is too barefaced.  Constable, my good fellow, we had better be going.', 'What! Does he deny that he did? ask him, somebody, pray.  Ask him to tell you whether he did or not!', 'Did you, sir?', 'I tell you what, gentlemen, he', 'he', 'Gentlemen, Master, Mr Abel, Mr Witherden, every one of you--he did it!  What I have done to offend him, I don s a plot, and whatever comes of it, I will say with my dying breath that he put that note in my hat himself!  Look at him, gentlemen! see how he changes colour.  Which of us looks the guilty person--he, or I?', 'You hear him, gentlemen? you hear him.  Now, does this case strike you as assuming rather a black complexion, or does it not?  Is it at all a treacherous case, do you think, or is it one of mere ordinary guilt?  Perhaps, gentlemen, if he had not said this in your presence and I had reported it, you', 'Now then, come on!', 'Where to, Sir?', 'Now, ladies, ladies, I s allowanced here, you know.  You mustn s against all rules.', 'I --sobbed Mrs Nubbles, curtseying humbly, ', 'and this is his brother, sir.  Oh dear me, dear me!', 'Well! It can t the only one in the same fix.  You mustn', 'Oh! my darling Kit, s mother had charitably relieved of the baby, ', 'You don', 'I believe it! I that never knew you tell a lie, or do a bad action from your cradle--that have never had a moment s been a comfort to me from the hour of his birth until this time, and that I never laid down one night in anger with!  I believe it of you Kit!--', 'Why then, thank God! and I can bear it, mother!  Come what may, I shall always have one drop of happiness in my heart when I think that you said that.', 'I have brought him a little something to eat, If you please, Sir, might he have it?', 'If you please, Sir, might he have it?', 'Yes,--he may have it.  There ll take care he has it.', 'No, but if you please sir--don', 'This is Christopher Nubbles, isn', 'Then here  said the other man to Christopher.   t a discharge in it.', 'I beg your pardon, Who sent it me?', 'Why, your friend, You', 'My friend!', 'You  returned the other man.   s his letter.  Take hold!', 'Drink of this cup, you s a spell in its every drop  s).--If they ever send it in a flat state, complain to the Governor.  Yours, R. S.', 'gainst the ills of mortality.  Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!  HER cup was a fiction, but this is reality (Barclay and Co.', 'R. S.! It must be Mr Richard Swiveller.  Well, its very kind of him, and I thank him heartily.', 'A treacherous place to pick one  muttered Sampson, as he stumbled for the twentieth time over some stray lumber, and limped in pain.   s more protection than a dozen men.', 'What  murmured the lawyer, standing on tiptoe, and endeavouring to obtain a glimpse of what was passing inside, which at that distance was impossible-- m always afraid to come here by myself, when his account t believe he d mind killing a rat--indeed I don t consider it a pleasant joke.  Hark!  Now he', 'He  muttered Brass, after he had listened to two or three repetitions of the chant.    cried Brass, as the chant began again.  ', 'Come in!', 'How do you do to-night sir? Ha ha ha! How do you do sir?  Oh dear me, how very whimsical!  Amazingly whimsical to be sure!', 'Come in, you fool! and don', 'He has the richest humour! the most amazing vein of comicality!  But isn', 'the most amazing vein of comicality!  But isn', 'What? What, Judas?', 'Judas! He has such extraordinary spirits!  His humour is so extremely playful!  Judas!  Oh yes--dear me, how very good!  Ha ha ha!', 'Do you know it? s eyes.  ', 'Eh? Now I look at it again, I fancy I see a--yes, there certainly is something in the smile that reminds me of--and yet upon my word I--', 'Is it like Kit--is it his picture, his image, his very self? Is it the exact model and counterpart of the dog--is it--is it--is it?', 'Excellent indeed! He he!  Oh, very good Sir.  You know, he', 'Sit down, I bought the dog yesterday.  I', 'Ha ha! Extremely entertaining, indeed!', 'Come here, What', 'Nothing Sir--nothing.  Scarcely worth mentioning Sir; but I thought that song--admirably humorous in itself you know--was perhaps rather--', 'Yes, rather what?', 'Just bordering, or as one may say remotely verging, upon the confines of injudiciousness perhaps, Sir,', 'Why?', 'Why, you know, sir, --the fact is, sir, that any allusion to these little combinings together, of friends, for objects in themselves extremely laudable, but which the law terms conspiracies, are--you take me, sir?--best kept snug and among friends, you know.', '--the fact is, sir, that any allusion to these little combinings together, of friends, for objects in themselves extremely laudable, but which the law terms conspiracies, are--you take me, sir?--best kept snug and among friends, you know.', 'Eh! What do you mean?', 'What do you mean?', 'Cautious, exceedingly cautious, very right and proper! Mum, sir, even here--my meaning, sir, exactly.', 'YOUR meaning exactly, you brazen scarecrow,--what  retorted Quilp.  ', 'No no, sir--certainly not; not by any means,', 'If you so wink and nod at me, I s face, I will.', 'Don  rejoined Brass, checking himself with great alacrity.   re quite right, sir, quite right.  I shouldn s much better not to.  You', 'No? Why not?', 'Why, sir, he--dear me, Mr Quilp, sir--', 'What', 'You have forgotten the water, sir, And--excuse me, sir--but it', 'But first, have a drop yourself--a nice drop--a good, warm, fiery drop.', 'Why, sir, if there was such a thing as a mouthful of water that could be got without trouble--', 'There  cried the dwarf.   s the thing for them--eh, Brass, eh?', 'Ha ha ha! Oh very biting! and yet it s a pleasure in it too, sir!', 'Drink that, Toss it off, don', 'Toss it off, don', 'The lodger, --what about him?', 'He is still, sir, stopping with the Garland family.  He has only been home once, Sir, since the day of the examination of that culprit.  He informed Mr Richard, sir, that he couldn', 'Yah! Never thinking of anybody but yourself--why don', 'Why, sir, upon my word I think Sarah', 'Moisten your clay, wet the other eye, drink, man! You took a clerk to oblige me.', 'You took a clerk to oblige me.', 'Delighted, sir, I am sure, at any time, Yes, Sir, I did.', 'Then now you may discharge him, There', 'Discharge Mr Richard, sir?', 'Have you more than one clerk, you parrot, that you ask the question? Yes.', 'Upon my word, Sir, I wasn', 'How could you be? when I wasn', 'I quite understood that, sir, Thoroughly.', 'Well, Sir, and do you understand now, that they t be, if they have such men as your lodger searching for them, and scouring the country far and wide?', 'Of course I do, Sir,', 'Of course you do, Of course do you understand then, that it s no man for me, nor for you?', 'I have frequently said to Sarah, sir, that he was of no use at all in the business.  You can ll believe me I', 'Practical, sir, practical, but still extremely pleasant--immensely so!', 'but still extremely pleasant--immensely so!', 'Hearken to me, will you? or I s no chance of his comrade and friend returning.  The scamp has been obliged to fly, as I learn, for some knavery, and has found his way abroad.  Let him rot there.', 'Certainly, sir.  Quite proper.--Forcible! Extremely forcible!', 'I hate him, and have always hated him, for family reasons.  Besides, he was an intractable ruffian; otherwise he would have been of use.  This fellow is pigeon-hearted and light-headed.  I don', 'By all means, sir, When would you wish him, sir, to--ha, ha!--to make that little excursion?', 'When this trial  said Quilp.   s ended, send him about his business.', 'It shall be done, sir, by all means.  It will be rather a blow to Sarah, sir, but she has all her feelings under control.  Ah, Mr Quilp, I often think, sir, if it had only pleased Providence to bring you and Sarah together, in earlier life, what blessed results would have flowed from such a union!  You never saw our dear father, sir?--A charming gentleman.  Sarah was his pride and joy, sir.  He would have closed his eyes in bliss, would Foxey, Mr Quilp, if he could have found her such a partner.  You esteem her, sir?', 'I love her,', 'You  returned Brass, ', 'None, Let us drink the lovely Sarah.', 'If we could do it in something, sir, that wasn  suggested Brass humbly,  s feelings, when she comes to hear from me of the honour you have done her, if she learns it was in liquor rather cooler than the last, Sir.', 'Good bye, Sir, Good bye, Sir.', 'Won  said the dwarf, peeping out.  ', 'I couldn  replied Brass, who was almost dead from nausea and the closeness of the room.   d have the goodness to show me a light, so that I may see my way across the yard, sir--', 'To be sure, Be careful how you go, my dear friend.  Be sure to pick your way among the timber, for all the rusty nails are upwards. There t go too near him.', 'Which side of the road is he, sir?', 'He lives on the right hand, but sometimes he hides on the left, ready for a spring.  He ll never forgive you if you don s the light out--never mind--you know the way--straight on!', 'Mr Swiveller, Pray sir, where did you dine yesterday? Where did I dine yesterday? Aye, sir, where did you dine yesterday--was it near here, sir? Oh to be sure--yes--just over the way. To be sure.  Yes.  Just over the way, s gentleman, with a glance at the court.-- --  says Mr Swiveller, who has not caught the question--  repeats Mr Brass did you dine alone?  Did you treat anybody, sir? Come! Oh yes, to be sure--yes, I did, Have the goodness to banish a levity, sir, which is very ill-suited to the place in which you stand (though perhaps you have reason to be thankful that it  says Mr Brass s legitimate sphere of action;  --Mr Swiveller is proceeding to explain--  cries Mr Brass But will you allow me-- Yes or No, sir Yes it was, but-- Yes it was, And a very pretty witness YOU are!', 'Some friend will rise up for us, mother, I am sure.  If not now, before long.  My innocence will come out, mother, and I shall be brought back again; I feel confidence in that.  You must teach little Jacob and the baby how all this was, for if they thought I had ever been dishonest, when they grew old enough to understand, it would break my heart to know it, if I was thousands of miles away.--Oh! is there no good gentleman here, who will take care of her!', 'Mr Richard, sir, Good evening!', 'Money? Ha ha!  To be sure, Mr Richard, to be sure, sir.  All men must live.  You haven', 'No,', 'Oh! here re very welcome I', 'You needn  said Brass, ', 'Eh?', 'You see, Mr Richard, the fact is, that a man of your abilities is lost, Sir, quite lost, in our dry and mouldy line. It ll look in to see us now and then.  Sally, Sir, will be delighted I s extremely sorry to lose you, Mr Richard, but a sense of her duty to society reconciles her.  An amazing creature that, sir!  You s a cracked window sir, but I', 'I  thought Richard,  s clear.  When I went to bed, my hands were not made of egg-shells; and now I can almost see through  m asleep.  Not the least.', 'em.  If this is not a dream, I have woke up, by mistake, in an Arabian Night, instead of a London one.  But I have no doubt I', 'Very remarkable! I never dreamt such a real cough as that before.  I don s part of the philosophy of dreams that one never does.  There m dreaming rather fast!', 'Queerer still! I came to bed rather plump than otherwise, and now there ll take another survey.', 'It s what it is, I  said Mr Swiveller, turning languidly round on his pillow, and looking on that side of his bed which was next the wall,  s gone.', 'Marchioness, be pleased to draw nearer.  First of all, will you have the goodness to inform me where I shall find my voice; and secondly, what has become of my flesh?', 'I begin to infer, from your manner, and these appearances, Marchioness, that I have been ill.', 'You just have! And haven', 'Oh! Very ill, Marchioness, have I been?', 'Dead, all but, I never thought you', 'Three weeks to-morrow,', 'Three what?', 'Weeks, three long, slow weeks.', 'Marchioness, how', 'What, haven', 'Seen her! Bless you, I', 'And where do you live, Marchioness?', 'Live! Here!', 'Oh!', 'And so, you have run away?', 'Yes, and they', 'Been--I beg your pardon, what have they been doing?', 'Been a tizing of me--tizing you know--in the newspapers,', 'Aye, aye, advertising?', 'Tell me, how it was that you thought of coming here.', 'Why, you see, when you was gone, I hadn t know where either him or you was to be found, you know.  But one morning, when I was--', 'Was near a keyhole?', 'Well then, when I was near the office keyhole--as you see me through, you know--I heard somebody saying that she lived here, and was the lady whose house you lodged at, and that you was took very bad, and wouldn s no business of mine," he says; and Miss Sally, she says, "He s no business of mine;" and the lady went away, and slammed the door to, when she went out, I can tell you.  So I run away that night, and come here, and told  ve been here ever since.', 'em you was my brother, and they believed me, and I', 'This poor little Marchioness has been wearing herself to death!', 'No I haven  she returned,  t you mind about me.  I like sitting up, and I  winder, and if you could have heard how you used to keep on singing and making speeches, you wouldn m so glad you', 'Liverer indeed! It', 'The doctor, said you was to be kept quite still, and there was to be no noise nor nothing.  Now, take a rest, and then we ll sit by you, you know.  If you shut your eyes, perhaps you ll be all the better for it, if you do.', 'Just gone half after six,', 'Marchioness, what has become of Kit?', 'Has he gone? his mother--how is she,--what has become of her?', 'Yes, do, It will amuse me.', 'Oh! would it though! I know better than that.  Wait till you ll tell you.', 'Oh there  said the small servant.   t anything to do with you.', 'Has it anything to do with--is it anything you heard through chinks or keyholes--and that you were not intended to hear?', 'Yes,', 'In--in Bevis Marks? Conversations between Brass and Sally?', 'Yes,', 'But if you begin to do that, I', 'You can  said Dick.   s a darling.  Speak, sister, speak.  Pretty Polly say.  Oh tell me when, and tell me where, pray Marchioness, I beseech you!', 'Well!  Before I run away, I used to sleep in the kitchen--where we played cards, you know.  Miss Sally used to keep the key of the kitchen door in her pocket, and she always come down at night to take away the candle and rake out the fire.  When she had done that, she left me to go to bed in the dark, locked the door on the outside, put the key in her pocket again, and kept me locked up till she come down in the morning--very early I can tell you--and let me out.  I was terrible afraid of being kept like this, because if there was a fire, I thought they might forget me and only take care of themselves you know.  So, whenever I see an old rusty key anywhere, I picked it up and tried if it would fit the door, and at last I found in the dust cellar a key that did fit it.', 'They kept me very short, Oh! you can d gone to bed, and feel about in the dark for bits of biscuit, or sangwitches that you', 'If you make believe very much, it  said the small servant,  t, you know, it seems as if it would bear a little more seasoning, certainly.  Well, sometimes I used to come out after they  at the office fire; and I tell you the truth, that I come to listen again, about the key of the safe.', 'There was him and her, a-sittin s a dangerous thing, and it might get us into a world of trouble, and I don re the chickenest-hearted, feeblest, faintest man I ever see, and I think," she says, "that I ought to have been the brother, and you the sister.  Isn t we," she says, "constantly ruining somebody or other in the way of business?" "We certainly are," says Mr Brass.  "Then does it signify," she says, "about ruining this Kit when Quilp desires it?" "It certainly does not signify," says Mr Brass.  Then they whispered and laughed for a long time about there being no danger if it was well done, and then Mr Brass pulls out his pocket-book, and says, "Well," he says, "here it is--Quilp ll agree that way, then," he says. "Kit s up-stairs, you ll clear off Mr Richard.  Having Kit alone, I ll manage so, besides," he says, "that Mr Richard shall find it there, and be the evidence.  And if that don s way, and satisfy Mr Quilp s in it." Miss Sally laughed, and said that was the plan, and as they seemed to be moving away, and I was afraid to stop any longer, I went down-stairs again.--There!', 's own five-pound note.  We s coming to-morrow morning, I know.  While he ll get out of the way, and I ll hold him in conversation, and put this property in his hat.  I t get Christopher out of Mr Quilp s grudges," he says, "the Devil', 's own five-pound note.  We s coming to-morrow morning, I know.  While he ll get out of the way, and I ll hold him in conversation, and put this property in his hat.  I t get Christopher out of Mr Quilp s grudges," he says, "the Devil', 's coming to-morrow morning, I know.  While he ll get out of the way, and I ll hold him in conversation, and put this property in his hat.  I t get Christopher out of Mr Quilp s grudges," he says, "the Devil', 'How could it be? I was almost afraid to think about it, and hoped the young man would be let off.  When I heard  t do, you was gone, and so was the lodger--though I think I should have been frightened to tell him, even if he ve been out of your senses, and what would have been the good of telling you then?', 'Marchioness, if you ll get up.', 'You mustn', 'I must indeed, Whereabouts are my clothes?', 'Whereabouts are my clothes?', 'Oh, I t got any,', 'Ma', 'I t take on about that, You', 'I am afraid, that you', 'I suppose, I suppose there', 'No, nothing.', 'It  said Mr Swiveller, ', 'Oh! you  said the man--who didn I wish I had the rewarding of you--I do.', 'What has he been doing?', 'He s heart out, He is the most wicious rascal--Woa then, will you?', 'He  said Mr Abel, getting in, and taking the reins.   s a very good fellow if you know how to manage him.  This is the first time he has been out, this long while, for he has lost his old driver and wouldn s well.  Be here to take him to-morrow, if you please.  Good night!', 'Don  replied the still panting messenger.   ve run such a way after you!', 'What do you want with me? How did you come here?', 'I got in behind, Oh please drive on, sir--don s of consequence.  There', 'What do you tell me, child?', 'The truth, upon my word and honour I do.  But please to drive on-- quick, please!  I ll think I', 'See!  It  said the Marchioness, pointing to one where there was a faint light.  ', 'An  said his guide, in an earnest whisper.   d say it was, if you had only seen him two or three days ago.', 'Why, how is this? You have been ill?', 'You have been ill?', 'Very, Nearly dead.  You might have chanced to hear of your Richard on his bier, but for the friend I sent to fetch you. Another shake of the hand, Marchioness, if you please.  Sit down, Sir.', 'I have sent for you, Sir, but she told you on what account?', 'She did.  I am quite bewildered by all this.  I really don', 'You  retorted Dick.   t you speak another word, Sir.', 'You have heard it all, and you m too giddy and too queer to suggest anything; but you and your friends will know what to do.  After this long delay, every minute is an age.  If ever you went home fast in your life, go home fast to-night.  Don s wanted; and as to me, you ll never forgive you!', 'That  said Dick; ', 'And that is, s hand, ', 'that you answer me this question truly, before I take a bit or drop. Is it too late?', 'For completing the work you began so well last night? No.  Set your mind at rest on that point.  It is not, I assure you.', 'You see this fellow--can I help this? No.  Certainly not.', 'No.  Certainly not.', 'Gentlemen, you re short of chairs here, among other trifles, but if you', 'What can we do for you?', 'If you could make the Marchioness yonder, a Marchioness, in real, sober earnest, I t, and as the question is not what you will do for me, but what you will do for somebody else who has a better claim upon you, pray sir let me know what you intend doing.', 'It  said the single gentleman, ', 'Gentlemen, I thank you.  Anybody in the helpless state that you see me in, is naturally anxious.  Don', 'Then, you see, my good fellow, that while we have no doubt whatever of the truth of this disclosure, which has so providentially come to light--', 'Meaning hers?', '--Meaning hers, of course.  While we have no doubt of that, or that a proper use of it would procure the poor lad ll agree with us, that to give him even the most distant chance of escape, if we could help it, would be monstrous.  You say with us, no doubt, if somebody must escape, let it be any one but he.', 'Yes, certainly.  That is if somebody must--but upon my word, I t it strike you in that light?', 'When she finds how much we know, and how we know it, and that she is clearly compromised already, we are not without strong hopes that we may be enabled through her means to punish the other two effectually.  If we could do that, she might go scot-free for aught I cared.', 'Pray ma  said the single gentleman, whom she found alone in the room, ', 'You did not expect to see me?', 'I didn  returned the beauty.   s about the apartments, of course you s very easily settled.  You', 'I am obliged to you for your good opinion, and quite concur in these sentiments.  But that is not the subject on which I wish to speak with you.', 'Oh! Then just state the particulars, will you?  I suppose it', 'Why, it is connected with the law, certainly.', 'Very well, My brother and I are just the same. I can take any instructions, or give you any advice.', 'As there are other parties interested besides myself, we had better confer together.  Miss Brass is here, gentlemen.', 'Miss Brass, we professional people understand each other, and, when we choose, can say what we have to say, in very few words.  You advertised a runaway servant, the other day?', 'Well, what of that?', 'She is found, ma  said the Notary, pulling out his pocket-handkerchief with a flourish.  ', 'Who found her?', 'We did, ma', 'And now I have heard from you, what have you got to say?  Something you have got into your heads about her, of course.  Prove it, will you--that t know it) that you have found the most artful, lying, pilfering, devilish little minx that was ever born.--Have you got her here?', 'No, she is not here at present, But she is quite safe.', 'Ha! s nose; ', 'I hope so, Did it occur to you for the first time, when you found she had run away, that there were two keys to your kitchen door?', 'Two keys, one of which gave her the opportunities of roaming through the house at nights when you supposed her fast locked up, and of overhearing confidential consultations--among others, that particular conference, to be described to-day before a justice, which you will have an opportunity of hearing her relate; that conference which you and Mr Brass held together, on the night before that most unfortunate and innocent young man was accused of robbery, by a horrible device of which I will only say that it may be characterised by the epithets which you have applied to this wretched little witness, and by a few stronger ones besides.', 'Come, come, Miss Brass, you have great command of feature, but you feel, I see, that by a chance which never entered your imagination, this base design is revealed, and two of its plotters must be brought to justice.  Now, you know the pains and penalties you are liable to, and so I need not dilate upon them, but I have a proposal to make to you.  You have the honour of being sister to one of the greatest scoundrels unhung; and, if I may venture to say so to a lady, you are in every respect quite worthy of him.  But connected with you two is a third party, a villain of the name of Quilp, the prime mover of the whole diabolical device, who I believe to be worse than either. For his sake, Miss Brass, do us the favour to reveal the whole history of this affair.  Let me remind you that your doing so, at our instance, will place you in a safe and comfortable position--your present one is not desirable--and cannot injure your brother; for against him and you we have quite sufficient evidence (as you hear) already.  I will not say to you that we suggest this course in mercy (for, to tell you the truth, we do not entertain any regard for you), but it is a necessity to which we are reduced, and I recommend it to you as a matter of the very best policy.  Time, in a business like this, is exceedingly precious.  Favour us with your decision as speedily as possible, ma', 'I am to accept or reject at once, am I?', 'Yes,', 'Excuse me, Wait a bit!', 'Sarah, hold your tongue if you please, and let me speak. Gentlemen, if I could express the pleasure it gives me to see three such men in a happy unity of feeling and concord of sentiment, I think you would hardly believe me.  But though I am unfortunate--nay, gentlemen, criminal, if we are to use harsh expressions in a company like this--still, I have my feelings like other men.  I have heard of a poet, who remarked that feelings were the common lot of all.  If he could have been a pig, gentlemen, and have uttered that sentiment, he would still have been immortal.', 'If you  said Miss Brass harshly, ', 'Sarah, my dear,', 'He shuns me, even when I would, as I may say, heap coals of fire upon his head.  Well!  Ah! But I am a falling house, and the rats (if I may be allowed the expression in reference to a gentleman I respect and love beyond everything) fly from me! Gentlemen--regarding your conversation just now, I happened to see my sister on her way here, and, wondering where she could be going to, and being--may I venture to say?--naturally of a suspicious turn, followed her.  Since then, I have been listening.', 'If you  interposed Miss Sally, ', 'Sarah, my dear, I thank you kindly, but will still proceed.  Mr Witherden, sir, as we have the honour to be members of the same profession--to say nothing of that other gentleman having been my lodger, and having partaken, as one may say, of the hospitality of my roof--I think you might have given me the refusal of this offer in the first instance.  I do indeed.  Now, my dear Sir, suffer me to speak, I beg.', 'If you will do me the favour, to look at this, you will naturally inquire, in your own minds, how did I get it.  If you look from that, to my face, you will wonder what could have been the cause of all these scratches.  And if from them to my hat, how it came into the state in which you see it.  Gentlemen, to all these questions I answer--Quilp!', 'I say, that I answer to all these questions,--Quilp--Quilp, who deludes me into his infernal den, and takes a delight in looking on and chuckling while I scorch, and burn, and bruise, and maim myself--Quilp, who never once, no never once, in all our communications together, has treated me otherwise than as a dog--Quilp, whom I have always hated with my whole heart, but never so much as lately.  He gives me the cold shoulder on this very matter as if he had had nothing to do with it, instead of being the first to propose it.  I can d let it out, if it was murder, and never think of himself so long as he could terrify me.  Now, what does all this lead to?--what should you say it led me to, gentlemen?--could you guess at all near the mark?', 'To be short with you, then, it leads me to this.  If the truth has come out, as it plainly has in a manner that there re not always over and above glad to see it--I had better turn upon this man than let this man turn upon me.  It re safe.  I relate these circumstances for my own profit.', 'Now, gentlemen, I am not a man who does things by halves.  Being in for a penny, I am ready, as the saying is, to be in for a pound.  You must do with me what you please, and take me where you please.  If you wish to have this in writing, we', 'And this, this is my brother, is it!  This is my brother, that I have worked and toiled for, and believed to have had something of the man in him!', 'Sarah, my dear, you disturb our friends.  Besides you--you', 'Yes, you pitiful dastard, I understand you.  You feared that I should be beforehand with you.  But do you think that I would have been enticed to say a word!  I', 'He he! You think so, Sarah, you think so perhaps; but you would have acted quite different, my good fellow.  You will not have forgotten that it was a maxim with Foxey--our revered father, gentlemen--"Always suspect everybody." That d have done it by this time.  And therefore I  added Brass, allowing himself to be slightly overcome,  s better that a female should be spared it.', 'Gentlemen, I will justify the tenderness with which I know I shall be treated; and as, without tenderness, I should, now that this discovery has been made, stand in the worst position of the three, you may depend upon it I will make a clean breast.  Mr Witherden, sir, a kind of faintness is upon my spirits--if you would do me the favour to ring the bell and order up a glass of something warm and spicy, I shall, notwithstanding what has passed, have a melancholy pleasure in drinking your good health.  I had hoped, to have seen you three gentlemen, one day or another, with your legs under the mahogany in my humble parlour in the Marks.  But hopes are fleeting.  Dear me!', 'As you are so much better, I may venture to communicate to you a piece of news which has come to me professionally.', 'Certainly, sir.  I hope it', 'If I thought it so, I should choose some better time for communicating it, Let me tell you, first, that my friends who have been here to-day, know nothing of it, and that their kindness to you has been quite spontaneous and with no hope of return.  It may do a thoughtless, careless man, good, to know that.', 'I have been making some inquiries about you, little thinking that I should find you under such circumstances as those which have brought us together.  You are the nephew of Rebecca Swiveller, spinster, deceased, of Cheselbourne in Dorsetshire.', 'little thinking that I should find you under such circumstances as those which have brought us together.  You are the nephew of Rebecca Swiveller, spinster, deceased, of Cheselbourne in Dorsetshire.', 'Deceased!', 'Deceased.  If you had been another sort of nephew, you would have come into possession (so says the will, and I see no reason to doubt it) of five-and-twenty thousand pounds.  As it is, you have fallen into an annuity of one hundred and fifty pounds a year; but I think I may congratulate you even upon that.', 'Sir, you may.  For, please God, we', 'Only me, Quilp,', 'Only you! And what brings you here, you jade?  How dare you approach the ogre', 'I have come with some news, Don', 'Is it good news, pleasant news, news to make a man skip and snap his fingers? Is the dear old lady dead?', 'I don s good or bad,', 'Then she  said Quilp,  s nothing the matter with her.  Go home again, you bird of evil note, go home!', 'I have brought a letter,', 'Toss it in at the window here, and go your ways, or I', 'No, but please, Quilp--do hear me speak, Please do!', 'Speak then, Be quick and short about it.  Speak, will you?', 'It was left at our house this afternoon, by a boy who said he didn  she added, as her husband stretched out his hand for it,  t know how wet and cold I am, or how many times I have lost my way in coming here through this thick fog.  Let me dry myself at the fire for five minutes.  I', 'by a boy who said he didn  she added, as her husband stretched out his hand for it,  t know how wet and cold I am, or how many times I have lost my way in coming here through this thick fog.  Let me dry myself at the fire for five minutes.  I', 'please let me in.  You don ll go away directly you tell me to, Quilp.  Upon my word I will.', 'I re wet, I re cold.  I m glad your eyes are red with crying.  It does my heart good to see your little nose so pinched and frosty.', 'I re cold.  I m glad your eyes are red with crying.  It does my heart good to see your little nose so pinched and frosty.', 'Oh Quilp! How cruel it is of you!', 'Did she think I was dead? Did she think she was going to have all the money, and to marry somebody she liked?  Ha ha ha!  Did she?', 'So!  That little job being disposed of, I  he muttered, looking at the direction.  ', 'Sammy has been practised upon, and has broken confidence.  It has all come out.  You had better not be in the way, for strangers are going to call upon you.  They have been very quiet as yet, because they mean to surprise you.  Don t.  I am not to be found anywhere.  If I was you, I wouldn', 'If I had him here.  If I only had him here--', 'Oh Quilp! what', '--I should drown him, Too easy a death, too short, too quick--but the river runs close at hand.  Oh! if I had him here! just to take him to the brink coaxingly and pleasantly,--holding him by the button-hole--joking with him,--and, with a sudden push, to send him splashing down!  Drowning men come to the surface three times they say.  Ah!  To see him those three times, and mock him as his face came bobbing up,--oh, what a rich treat that would be!', 'Quilp! what has gone wrong?', 'Such a bloodless cur! I thought his cowardice and servility were the best guarantee for his keeping silence.  Oh Brass, Brass--my dear, good, affectionate, faithful, complimentary, charming friend--if I only had you here!', 'There! Take her home.  Don', 'As for you, ask no questions about me, make no search for me, say nothing concerning me. I shall not be dead, mistress, and that ll take care of you.', 'But, Quilp?  What is the matter?  Where are you going?  Do say something more?', 'I  said the dwarf, seizing her by the arm, ', 'Has anything happened? Oh!  Do tell me that?', 'Yes, No.  What matter which?  I have told you what to do.  Woe betide you if you fail to do it, or disobey me by a hair', 'I am going, I  faltered his wife,  t know what harm I may have brought about, but, great or little, I did it for you, Quilp.  My conscience misgave me when I did it.  Do answer me this question, if you please?', 'It will be a good night for travelling anonymously, Stay.  We may look better here.  This is too hospitable and free.', 'The fence between this wharf and the next is easily climbed, There', 'Oh Sampson! good worthy creature--if I could but hug you!  If I could only fold you in my arms, and squeeze your ribs, as I COULD squeeze them if I once had you tight--what a meeting there would be between us!  If we ever do cross each other again, Sampson, we', 'There  he said, with flashing eyes;  s too late?  When he sat there,--yonder there, over there,--with his white face, and red head, and sickly smile, why didn', 'And this, like every other trouble and anxiety I have had of late times, springs from that old dotard and his darling child--two wretched feeble wanderers!  I ll have my turn.----What', 'So soon! And so eager!  I am afraid I shall disappoint you.  It m quite prepared.  Sally, I thank you!', 'If they would knock again, the sound might guide me!  Come!  Batter the gate once more!', 'If I could find a wall or fence, I should know which way to turn.  A good, black, devil', 'For a journey, sir!', 'In company with me and my friend in the next room.  Can you guess its purpose?', 'Oh yes.  I think you do already, Try.', 'The place of their retreat is indeed discovered, at last. And that is our journey', 'Happy she is, beyond all doubt, And well, I--I trust she will be soon.  She has been weak and ailing, as I learn, but she was better when I heard this morning, and they were full of hope. Sit you down, and you shall hear the rest.', 'In the meantime, s shoulder, ', 'You have not been home so long, Christopher, You have not been home so long, that you need to be glad to go away again, I should think.', 'But for such a purpose, To bring back Miss Nell!  To see her again!  Only think of that!  I am so pleased too, to think that you will see her, Barbara, at last.', 'You  said Kit, rubbing his hands.   m sure you', 'What', 'Nothing,', 'Barbara, you', 'Why, I do, Of course I do.', 'No, but Barbara, let us part friends.  I was always thinking of you, in my troubles.  I should have been a great deal more miserable than I was, if it hadn', 'I am telling you the truth, Barbara, upon my word, but not half so strong as I could wish, When I want you to be pleased to see Miss Nell, it s all.  As to her, Barbara, I think I could almost die to do her service, but you would think so too, if you knew her as I do. I am sure you would.', 'I have been used, you see, to talk and think of her, almost as if she was an angel.  When I look forward to meeting her again, I think of her smiling as she used to do, and being glad to see me, and putting out her hand and saying, "It s as her old servant, and one that loved her dearly, as his kind, good, gentle mistress; and who would have gone--yes, and still would go--through any harm to serve her.  Once, I couldn m the better for that--and I don m the worse--I am grateful to her for it, and love and honour her the more.  That', 'Snobby  he said to Mr Abel Garland.   t in the last trip because it was expected that his presence wouldn', 'To whom, Sir?', 'To the old gentleman,', 'Our client prefers to take him now, There is no longer any need for that precaution, as my father', 'Ah! anybody but me! Snobby before me, of course.  He didn s always up to something of that sort.  I always said it, long before this came out.  Devilish pretty girl that!  ', 'Are you a good listener?', 'Like most other men, I suppose, I can be, if I am interested; and if not interested, I should still try to appear so.  Why do you ask?', 'I have a short narrative on my lips, and will try you with it.  It is very brief.', 'The youngest--there were reasons for his being sensitive and watchful--was the first to find this out.  I will not tell you what misery he underwent, what agony of soul he knew, how great his mental struggle was.  He had been a sickly child.  His brother, patient and considerate in the midst of his own high health and strength, had many and many a day denied himself the sports he loved, to sit beside his couch, telling him old stories till his pale face lighted up with an unwonted glow; to carry him in his arms to some green spot, where he could tend the poor pensive boy as he looked upon the bright summer day, and saw all nature healthy but himself; to be, in any way, his fond and faithful nurse.  I may not dwell on all he did, to make the poor, weak creature love him, or my tale would have no end.  But when the time of trial came, the younger brother', 'Through all the misery that followed this union; through all the cold neglect and undeserved reproach; through all the poverty he brought upon her; through all the struggles of their daily life, too mean and pitiful to tell, but dreadful to endure; she toiled on, in the deep devotion of her spirit, and in her better nature, as only women can. Her means and substance wasted; her father nearly beggared by her husband  date, leaving to her father', 'It was then, when the love of two dead people who had been nearest and dearest to his heart, was all transferred to this slight creature; when her face, constantly before him, reminded him, from hour to hour, of the too early change he had seen in such another--of all the sufferings he had watched and known, and all his child had undergone; when the young man', 'Then, dreams of their young, happy life--happy to him though laden with pain and early care--visited his pillow yet oftener than before; and every night, a boy again, he was at his brother s door!', 'The rest, I know.', 'Yes, we may spare ourselves the sequel.  You know the poor result of all my search.  Even when by dint of such inquiries as the utmost vigilance and sagacity could set on foot, we found they had been seen with two poor travelling showmen--and in time discovered the men themselves--and in time, the actual place of their retreat; even then, we were too late.  Pray God, we are not too late again!', 'We cannot be, This time we must succeed.', 'I have believed and hoped so, I try to believe and hope so still.  But a heavy weight has fallen on my spirits, my good friend, and the sadness that gathers over me, will yield to neither hope nor reason.', 'That does not surprise me, it is a natural consequence of the events you have recalled; of this dreary time and place; and above all, of this wild and dismal night.  A dismal night, indeed!  Hark! how the wind is howling!', 'This is the place, gentlemen, Halloa!  Past twelve o', 'Let us go on, and leave this good fellow to wake them, if he can.  I cannot rest until I know that we are not too late.  Let us go on, in the name of Heaven!', "'Tis hard weather this, and not a night to call me up in.  My trade is not of that kind that I need be roused from bed.  The business on which folks want me, will keep cold, especially at this season.  What do you want?", 'I would not have roused you, if I had known you were old and ill,', 'Old! How do you know I am old?  Not so old as you think, friend, perhaps.  As to being ill, you will find many young people in worse case than I am.  More  said the old man,  s neither age nor illness; they never were--and I didn', 'I am sorry to call you from your bed, but those gentlemen you may see by the churchyard gate, are strangers too, who have just arrived from a long journey, and seek the parsonage-house.  You can direct us?', 'I should be able to, for, come next summer, I have been sexton here, good fifty years.  The right hand path, friend, is the road.--There is no ill news for our good gentleman, I hope?', 'for, come next summer, I have been sexton here, good fifty years.  The right hand path, friend, is the road.--There is no ill news for our good gentleman, I hope?', 'What is that? Has my dream come true? Pray speak to me, whoever that is, awake and up.', 'Poor boy! how goes it, darling?', 'Has my dream come true? But no, that can never be!  How could it be--Oh! how could it!', 'I guess his meaning, To bed again, poor boy!', 'Ay! I knew it could never be, I felt too sure of that, before I asked!  But, all to-night, and last night too, it was the same.  I never fall asleep, but that cruel dream comes back.', 'Try to sleep again, It will go in time.', 'No no, I would rather that it staid--cruel as it is, I would rather that it staid, I am not afraid to have it in my sleep, but I am so sad--so very, very sad.', 'What light is that!', 'It is surely, in the ruin where they live.  I see no other ruin hereabouts.', 'They cannot, be waking at this late hour--', 'Master! Dear master.  Speak to me!', 'Dear master.  Speak to me!', 'This is another!--How many of these spirits there have been to-night!', 'No spirit, master.  No one but your old servant.  You know me now, I am sure?  Miss Nell--where is she--where is she?', 'They all say that! They all ask the same question.  A spirit!', 'Where is she? Oh tell me but that,--but that, dear master!', 'She is asleep--yonder--in there.', 'Thank God!', 'Aye!  Thank God! I have prayed to Him, many, and many, and many a livelong night, when she has been asleep, He knows.  Hark!  Did she call?', 'I heard no voice.', 'You did.  You hear her now.  Do you tell me that you don', 'Nor that? Can any body know that voice so well as I?  Hush!  Hush!', 'She is still asleep, You were right.  She did not call--unless she did so in her slumber.  She has called to me in her sleep before now, sir; as I have sat by, watching, I have seen her lips move, and have known, though no sound came from them, that she spoke of me.  I feared the light might dazzle her eyes and wake her, so I brought it here.', 'She is sleeping soundly, but no wonder.  Angel hands have strewn the ground deep with snow, that the lightest footstep may be lighter yet; and the very birds are dead, that they may not wake her. She used to feed them, Sir.  Though never so cold and hungry, the timid things would fly from us.  They never flew from her!', 'Why dost thou lie so idle there, dear Nell, when there are bright red berries out of doors waiting for thee to pluck them! Why dost thou lie so idle there, when thy little friends come creeping to the door, crying "where is Nell--sweet Nell?"--and sob, and weep, because they do not see thee.  She was always gentle with children. The wildest would do her bidding--she had a tender way with them, indeed she had!', 'Her little homely dress,--her favourite! She will miss it when she wakes.  They have hid it here in sport, but she shall have it--she shall have it.  I would not vex my darling, for the wide world', 'She was not wont to be a lie-abed; but she was well then.  We must have patience.  When she is well again, she will rise early, as she used to do, and ramble abroad in the healthy morning time.  I often tried to track the way she had gone, but her small footstep left no print upon the dewy ground, to guide me.  Who is that?  Shut the door. Quick!--Have we not enough to do to drive away that marble cold, and keep her warm!', 'Another night, and not in bed! I hoped you would be more mindful of your promise to me.  Why do you not take some rest?', 'Sleep has left me, It is all with her!', 'It would pain her very much to know that you were watching thus, You would not give her pain?', 'I am not so sure of that, if it would only rouse her.  She has slept so very long.  And yet I am rash to say so.  It is a good and happy sleep--eh?', 'Indeed it is, Indeed, indeed, it is!', 'That', 'Happy too.  Happier than tongue can tell, or heart of man conceive.', 'He will hear me, I am sure.  He will hear either me or you if we beseech him.  She would, at all times.', 'I will hear any voice she liked to hear, I love all she loved!', 'I know you do, I am certain of it. Think of her; think of all the sorrows and afflictions you have shared together; of all the trials, and all the peaceful pleasures, you have jointly known.', 'I do.  I do.  I think of nothing else.', 'I would have you think of nothing else to-night--of nothing but those things which will soften your heart, dear friend, and open it to old affections and old times.  It is so that she would speak to you herself, and in her name it is that I speak now.', 'You do well to speak softly, We will not wake her.  I should be glad to see her eyes again, and to see her smile. There is a smile upon her young face now, but it is fixed and changeless.  I would have it come and go.  That shall be in Heaven', 'Let us not talk of her in her sleep, but as she used to be when you were journeying together, far away--as she was at home, in the old house from which you fled together--as she was, in the old cheerful time,', 'She was always cheerful--very cheerful, There was ever something mild and quiet about her, I remember, from the first; but she was of a happy nature.', 'We have heard you say, that in this and in all goodness, she was like her mother.  You can think of, and remember her?', 'Or even one before her, It is many years ago, and affliction makes the time longer, but you have not forgotten her whose death contributed to make this child so dear to you, even before you knew her worth or could read her heart?  Say, that you could carry back your thoughts to very distant days--to the time of your early life--when, unlike this fair flower, you did not pass your youth alone. Say, that you could remember, long ago, another child who loved you dearly, you being but a child yourself.  Say, that you had a brother, long forgotten, long unseen, long separated from you, who now, at last, in your utmost need came back to comfort and console you--', 'To be to you what you were once to him, to repay your old affection, brother dear, by constant care, solicitude, and love; to be, at your right hand, what he has never ceased to be when oceans rolled between us; to call to witness his unchanging truth and mindfulness of bygone days, whole years of desolation.  Give me but one word of recognition, brother--and never--no never, in the brightest moment of our youngest days, when, poor silly boys, we thought to pass our lives together--have we been half as dear and precious to each other as we shall be from this time hence!', 'If we were knit together then, what will be the bond between us now!  Our love and fellowship began in childhood, when life was all before us, and will be resumed when we have proved it, and are but children at the last.  As many restless spirits, who have hunted fortune, fame, or pleasure through the world, retire in their decline to where they first drew breath, vainly seeking to be children once again before they die, so we, less fortunate than they in early life, but happier in its closing scenes, will set up our rest again among our boyish haunts, and going home with no hope realised, that had its growth in manhood--carrying back nothing that we brought away, but our old yearnings to each other--saving no fragment from the wreck of life, but that which first endeared it--may be, indeed, but children as at first.  And even, even if what I dread to name has come to pass--even if that be so, or is to be (which Heaven forbid and spare us!)--still, dear brother, we are not apart, and have that comfort in our great affliction.', 'You plot among you to wean my heart from her.  You never will do that--never while I have life.  I have no relative or friend but her--I never had--I never will have.  She is all in all to me.  It is too late to part us now.', 'It is not, it is not on earth that Heaven', 'Neighbour! s mother dwelt, ', 'Why, you yourself--you wear the colour too? Windows are closed that never used to be by day.  What does this mean?', 'We must go back, We must see what this is.', 'No, no, Remember what you promised. Our way is to the old green lane, where she and I so often were, and where you found us, more than once, making those garlands for her garden.  Do not turn back!', 'Where is she now? Tell me that.', 'Do you not know? Did we not leave her, but just now?', 'True.  True.  It was her we left--was it?', 'Do you--do you bury any one to-day?', 'No, no!  Who should we bury, Sir?', 'Aye, who indeed!  I say with you, who indeed!', 'It is a holiday with us, good Sir, We have no work to do to-day.', 'Why then, I  said the old man, turning to the child.   re sure of what you tell me?  You would not deceive me?  I am changed, even in the little time since you last saw me.', 'Go thy ways with him, Sir, and Heaven be with ye both!', 'I am quite ready, Come, boy, come--', 'Get up, pig! Don', 'It  said the pig, in a submissive manner, and not without cheerfulness;  s all the same.', 'Say what the hour is,', 'The mid-day bells will ring--in forty minutes.', 'You are a clock. How is it that you always know?', 'How can I say? I always know what the hour is, and where I am. I was brought in here at night, and out of a boat, but I know where I am. See here! Marseilles harbour; Toulon (where the galleys are), Spain over there, Algiers over _there_. Creeping away to the left here, Nice. Round by the Cornice to Genoa. Genoa Mole and Harbour. Quarantine Ground. City there; terrace gardens blushing with the bella donna. Here, Porto Fino. Stand out for Leghorn. Out again for Civita Vecchia, so away to--hey! there  he had got to the wall by this time;  s all one; it', 'Judge if I come back from Naples as I went! See here, my master! Civita Vecchia, Leghorn, Porto Fino, Genoa, Cornice, Off Nice (which is in there), Marseilles, you and me. The apartment of the jailer and his keys is where I put this thumb; and here at my wrist they keep the national razor in its case--the guillotine locked up.', 'How goes the world this forenoon, gentlemen? My little one, you see, going round with me to have a peep at her father', 'You don', 'Oh! but the master wins, and you lose. It', 'Poor birds!', 'Stay! she shall feed the birds. This big loaf is for Signor John Baptist. We must break it to get it through into the cage. So, there', 'There! I have expended all the money I received; here is the note of it, and _that', 'To try me, eh?', 'You have said it. To try you.', 'There is no news for me?', 'Lady of mine! Am I to lie here all my life, my father?', 'What do I know! My friend, how is it possible for me to tell how long you are to lie here? What do I know, John Baptist Cavalletto? Death of my life! There are prisoners here sometimes, who are not in such a devil of a hurry to be tried.', 'Adieu, my birds!', 'Adieu, my birds!', 'How do you find the bread?', 'A little dry, but I have my old sauce here,', 'How sauce?', 'I can cut my bread so--like a melon. Or so--like an omelette. Or so--like a fried fish. Or so--like Lyons sausage,', 'Here! You may drink. You may finish this.', 'Put the bottle by with the rest,', 'Here! You may have one.', 'A thousand thanks, my master!', 'What an infernal hole this is! Look at the light of day. Day? the light of yesterday week, the light of six months ago, the light of six years ago. So slack and dead!', 'Cavalletto, you know me for a gentleman?', 'Surely, surely!', 'How long have we been here?', 'I, eleven weeks, to-morrow night at midnight. You, nine weeks and three days, at five this afternoon.', 'Have I ever done anything here? Ever touched the broom, or spread the mats, or rolled them up, or found the draughts, or collected the dominoes, or put my hand to any kind of work?', 'Never!', 'Have you ever thought of looking to me to do any kind of work?', 'No! You knew from the first moment when you saw me here, that I was a gentleman?', 'ALTRO! I believe you!', 'Haha! You are right! A gentleman I am! And a gentleman I ll die! It s my game. Death of my soul, I play it out wherever I go!', 'Here I am! See me! Shaken out of destiny s well done! By Heaven! I win, however the game goes.', 'What', 'A little half-hour after mid-day.', 'Good! The President will have a gentleman before him soon. Come! Shall I tell you on what accusation? It must be now, or never, for I shall not return here. Either I shall go free, or I shall go to be made ready for shaving. You know where they keep the razor.', 'I am a I am a cosmopolitan gentleman. I own no particular country. My father was Swiss--Canton de Vaud. My mother was French by blood, English by birth. I myself was born in Belgium. I am a citizen of the world.', 'Call me five-and-thirty years of age. I have seen the world. I have lived here, and lived there, and lived like a gentleman everywhere. I have been treated and respected as a gentleman universally. If you try to prejudice me by making out that I have lived by my wits--how do your lawyers live--your politicians--your intriguers--your men of the Exchange?', 'Two years ago I came to Marseilles. I admit that I was poor; I had been ill. When your lawyers, your politicians, your intriguers, your men of the Exchange fall ill, and have not scraped money together, _they_ become poor. I put up at the Cross of Gold,--kept then by Monsieur Henri Barronneau--sixty-five at least, and in a failing state of health. I had lived in the house some four months when Monsieur Henri Barronneau had the misfortune to die;--at any rate, not a rare misfortune, that. It happens without any aid of mine, pretty often.', 'Monsieur Barronneau left a widow. She was two-and-twenty. She had gained a reputation for beauty, and (which is often another thing) was beautiful. I continued to live at the Cross of Gold. I married Madame Barronneau. It is not for me to say whether there was any great disparity in such a match. Here I stand, with the contamination of a jail upon me; but it is possible that you may think me better suited to her than her former husband was.', 'Be it as it may, Madame Barronneau approved of me. _That_ is not to prejudice me, I hope?', 'Now came the difficulties of our position. I am proud. I say nothing in defence of pride, but I am proud. It is also my character to govern. I can s relations interpose against a husband who is a gentleman, who is proud, and who must govern, the consequences are inimical to peace. There was yet another source of difference between us. Madame Rigaud was unfortunately a little vulgar. I sought to improve her manners and ameliorate her general tone; she (supported in this likewise by her relations) resented my endeavours. Quarrels began to arise between us; and, propagated and exaggerated by the slanders of the relations of Madame Rigaud, to become notorious to the neighbours. It has been said that I treated Madame Rigaud with cruelty. I may have been seen to slap her face--nothing more. I have a light hand; and if I have been seen apparently to correct Madame Rigaud in that manner, I have done it almost playfully.', 'I am sensitive and brave. I do not advance it as a merit to be sensitive and brave, but it is my character. If the male relations of Madame Rigaud had put themselves forward openly, I should have known how to deal with them. They knew that, and their machinations were conducted in secret; consequently, Madame Rigaud and I were brought into frequent and unfortunate collision. Even when I wanted any little sum of money for my personal expenses, I could not obtain it without collision--and I, too, a man whose character it is to govern! One night, Madame Rigaud and myself were walking amicably--I may say like lovers--on a height overhanging the sea. An evil star occasioned Madame Rigaud to advert to her relations; I reasoned with her on that subject, and remonstrated on the want of duty and devotion manifested in her allowing herself to be influenced by their jealous animosity towards her husband. Madame Rigaud retorted; I retorted; Madame Rigaud grew warm; I grew warm, and provoked her. I admit it. Frankness is a part of my character. At length, Madame Rigaud, in an access of fury that I must ever deplore, threw herself upon me with screams of passion (no doubt those that were overheard at some distance), tore my clothes, tore my hair, lacerated my hands, trampled and trod the dust, and finally leaped over, dashing herself to death upon the rocks below. Such is the train of incidents which malice has perverted into my endeavouring to force from Madame Rigaud a relinquishment of her rights; and, on her persistence in a refusal to make the concession I required, struggling with her--assassinating her!', 'Well, have you nothing to say to all that?', 'It', 'What do you mean?', 'Do you mean that I have not represented the case correctly?', 'Al-tro! Oh, by no means!', 'What then?', 'Presidents and tribunals are so prejudiced.', 'Well, let them do their worst!', 'Truly I think they will,', 'Now, Monsieur Rigaud, have the goodness to come out.', 'I am to depart in state, I see?', 'Why, unless you did, you might depart in so many pieces that it would be difficult to get you together again. There t love you.', 'No more of yesterday', 'I have heard none.', 'Then you may be sure there _is_ none. When these people howl, they howl to be heard.', 'Most people do, I suppose.', 'Ah! but these people are always howling. Never happy otherwise.', 'Do you mean the Marseilles people?', 'I mean the French people. They t exist without allonging and marshonging to something or other--victory or death, or blazes, or something.', 'Allong and marshong, indeed. It would be more creditable to you, I think, to let other people allong and marshong about their lawful business, instead of shutting ', 'Tiresome enough, But we shall be out to-day.', 'Out to-day! It', 'For no very strong reason, I must say. But as we come from the East, and as the East is the country of the plague--', 'The plague! That t stand the suspicion of the thing. I came here as well as ever I was in my life; but to suspect me of the plague is to give me the plague. And I have had it--and I have got it.', 'You bear it very well, Mr Meagles,', 'No. If you knew the real state of the case, that d as soon have a spit put through me, and be stuck upon a card in a collection of beetles, as lead the life I have been leading here.', 'Well, Mr Meagles, say no more about it now it', 'Over! Over! and why should I say no more about it because it', 'There! Never mind, Father, never mind! For goodness sake content yourself with Pet.', 'With Pet?', 'Now, I ask you, I ask you simply, as between man and man, you know, DID you ever hear of such damned nonsense as putting Pet in quarantine?', 'It has had the result of making even quarantine enjoyable.', 'Come! that', 'I beg your pardon,', 'Not at all,', 'May I ask you, what is the name of--', 'Tattycoram? I have not the least idea.', 'I thought, that--', 'Tattycoram?', 'Thank you--that Tattycoram was a name; and I have several times wondered at the oddity of it.', 'Why, the fact is, Mrs Meagles and myself are, you see, practical people.', 'That you have frequently mentioned in the course of the agreeable and interesting conversations we have had together, walking up and down on these stones,', 'Practical people. So one day, five or six years ago now, when we took Pet to church at the Foundling--you have heard of the Foundling Hospital in London? Similar to the Institution for the Found Children in Paris?', 'I have seen it.', 'Well! One day when we took Pet to church there to hear the music--because, as practical people, it is the business of our lives to show her everything that we think can please her--Mother (my usual name for Mrs Meagles) began to cry so, that it was necessary to take her out. "What s through my loving her so much, that it ever came into my head." "That ever what came into your head, Mother?" "O dear, dear!" cried Mother, breaking out again, "when I saw all those children ranged tier above tier, and appealing from the father none of them has ever known on earth, to the great Father of us all in Heaven, I thought, does any wretched mother ever come here, and look among those young faces, wondering which is the poor child she brought into this forlorn world, never through all its life to know her love, her kiss, her face, her voice, even her name!" Now that was practical in Mother, and I told her so. I said, "Mother, that', 's the matter, Mother?" said I, when we had brought her a little round: "you are frightening Pet, my dear." "Yes, I know that, Father," says Mother, "but I think it s what I call practical in you, my dear."', 's what I call practical in you, my dear."', 'So I said next day: Now, Mother, I have a proposition to make that I think you s the way we came by Tattycoram.', 'And the name itself--', 'By George! I was forgetting the name itself. Why, she was called in the Institution, Harriet Beadle--an arbitrary name, of course. Now, Harriet we changed into Hattey, and then into Tatty, because, as practical people, we thought even a playful name might be a new thing to her, and might have a softening and affectionate kind of effect, don t say was wholly out of the question. If there is anything that is not to be tolerated on any terms, anything that is a type of Jack-in-office insolence and absurdity, anything that represents in coats, waistcoats, and big sticks our English holding on by nonsense after every one has found it out, it is a beadle. You haven', 'As an Englishman who has been more than twenty years in China, no.', 'Then, s breast with great animation,  t you see a beadle, now, if you can help it. Whenever I see a beadle in full fig, coming down a street on a Sunday at the head of a charity school, I am obliged to turn and run away, or I should hit him. The name of Beadle being out of the question, and the originator of the Institution for these poor foundlings having been a blessed creature of the name of Coram, we gave that name to Pet', 'Your daughter, is your only child, I know, Mr Meagles. May I ask you--in no impertinent curiosity, but because I have had so much pleasure in your society, may never in this labyrinth of a world exchange a quiet word with you again, and wish to preserve an accurate remembrance of you and yours--may I ask you, if I have not gathered from your good wife that you have had other children?', 'No. No, Not exactly other children. One other child.', 'I am afraid I have inadvertently touched upon a tender theme.', 'Never mind, If I am grave about it, I am not at all sorrowful. It quiets me for a moment, but does not make me unhappy. Pet had a twin sister who died when we could just see her eyes--exactly like Pet', 'Ah! indeed, indeed!', 'Yes, and being practical people, a result has gradually sprung up in the minds of Mrs Meagles and myself which perhaps you may--or perhaps you may not--understand. Pet and her baby sister were so exactly alike, and so completely one, that in our thoughts we have never been able to separate them since. It would be of no use to tell us that our dead child was a mere infant. We have changed that child according to the changes in the child spared to us and always with us. As Pet has grown, that child has grown; as Pet has become more sensible and womanly, her sister has become more sensible and womanly by just the same degrees. It would be as hard to convince me that if I was to pass into the other world to-morrow, I should not, through the mercy of God, be received there by a daughter, just like Pet, as to persuade me that Pet herself is not a reality at my side.', 'I understand you,', 'As to her, the sudden loss of her little picture and playfellow, and her early association with that mystery in which we all have our equal share, but which is not often so forcibly presented to a child, has necessarily had some influence on her character. Then, her mother and I were not young when we married, and Pet has always had a sort of grown-up life with us, though we have tried to adapt ourselves to her. We have been advised more than once when she has been a little ailing, to change climate and air for her as often as we could--especially at about this time of her life--and to keep her amused. So, as I have no need to stick at a bank-desk now (though I have been poor enough in my time I assure you, or I should have married Mrs Meagles long before), we go trotting about the world. This is how you found us staring at the Nile, and the Pyramids, and the Sphinxes, and the Desert, and all the rest of it; and this is how Tattycoram will be a greater traveller in course of time than Captain Cook.', 'I thank you, very heartily for your confidence.', 'Don  returned Mr Meagles, ', 'Indeed, no. I am such a waif and stray everywhere, that I am liable to be drifted where any current may set.', 'It ll excuse my freedom in saying so--that you don', 'Perhaps I shall.', 'Ay! But I mean with a will.', 'I have no will. That is to say, next to none that I can put in action now. Trained by main force; broken, not bent; heavily ironed with an object on which I was never consulted and which was never mine; shipped away to the other end of the world before I was of age, and exiled there until my father', 'Light ', 'Ah! Easily said. I am the son, Mr Meagles, of a hard father and mother. I am the only child of parents who weighed, measured, and priced everything; for whom what could not be weighed, measured, and priced, had no existence. Strict people as the phrase is, professors of a stern religion, their very religion was a gloomy sacrifice of tastes and sympathies that were never their own, offered up as a part of a bargain for the security of their possessions. Austere faces, inexorable discipline, penance in this world and terror in the next--nothing graceful or gentle anywhere, and the void in my cowed heart everywhere--this was my childhood, if I may so misuse the word as to apply it to such a beginning of life.', 'Really though? That was a tough commencement. But come! You must now study, and profit by, all that lies beyond it, like a practical man.', 'If the people who are usually called practical, were practical in your direction--', 'Why, so they are!', 'Are they indeed?', 'Well, I suppose so, Eh? One can but _be_ practical, and Mrs Meagles and myself are nothing else.', 'My unknown course is easier and more helpful than I had expected to find it, then, Enough of me. Here is the boat.', 'Enough of me. Here is the boat.', 'But I bear those monotonous walls no ill-will now, One always begins to forgive a place as soon as it', 'One always begins to forgive a place as soon as it', 'Do you mean that a prisoner forgives his prison?', 'That was my speculation, Miss Wade. I don', 'Mademoiselle doubts, it', 'it', 'I do.', 'That I am not credulous?', 'Not exactly that. Put it another way. That you can', 'My experience, has been correcting my belief in many respects, for some years. It is our natural progress, I have heard.', 'Well, well! But it', 'If I had been shut up in any place to pine and suffer, I should always hate that place and wish to burn it down, or raze it to the ground. I know no more.', 'Strong, sir? Rather forcible in our fair friend, you', 'Rather forcible in our fair friend, you', 'Are you expecting any one to meet you here, Miss Wade?', 'I? No.', 'Father is sending to the Poste Restante. Shall he have the pleasure of directing the messenger to ask if there are any letters for you?', 'I thank him, but I know there can be none.', 'We are afraid, that you will feel quite deserted when we are all gone.', 'Indeed!', 'Not, not, of course, that we are any company to you, or that we have been able to be so, or that we thought you wished it.', 'I have not intended to make it understood that I did wish it.', 'No. Of course. But--in short, will you not allow Father to tender you any slight assistance or service? He will be very glad.', 'Very glad, Anything short of speaking the language, I shall be delighted to undertake, I am sure.', 'Anything short of speaking the language, I shall be delighted to undertake, I am sure.', 'I am obliged to you, but my arrangements are made, and I prefer to go my own way in my own manner.', '_Do_ you? Well! There', 'I am not much used to the society of young ladies, and I am afraid I may not show my appreciation of it as others might. A pleasant journey to you. Good-bye!', 'Good-bye! This is the last good-bye upon the list, for Mother and I have just said it to Mr Clennam here, and he only waits to say it to Pet. Good-bye! We may never meet again.', 'In our course through life we shall meet the people who are coming to meet _us_, from many strange places and by many strange roads, and what it is set to us to do to them, and what it is set to them to do to us, will all be done.', 'Your pretty daughter, starts to think of such things. Yet, you may be sure that there are men and women already on their road, who have their business to do with _you_, and who will do it. Of a certainty they will do it. They may be coming hundreds, thousands, of miles over the sea there; they may be close at hand now; they may be coming, for anything you know or anything you can do to prevent it, from the vilest sweepings of this very town.', 'Selfish brutes! Not caring what becomes of me! Leaving me here hungry and thirsty and tired, to starve, for anything they care! Beasts! Devils! Wretches!', 'Not caring what becomes of me! Leaving me here hungry and thirsty and tired, to starve, for anything they care! Beasts! Devils! Wretches!', 'My poor girl, what is the matter?', 'O yes it does; I am sorry to see you so.', 'You are not sorry, You are glad. You know you are glad. I never was like this but twice over in the quarantine yonder; and both times you found me. I am afraid of you.', 'Afraid of me?', 'Yes. You seem to come like my own anger, my own malice, my own--whatever it is--I don', 'I am younger than she is by two or three years, and yet it s she that', 'You must have patience.', 'I _won', 'If they take much care of themselves, and little or none of you, you must not mind it.', 'Hush! Be more prudent. You forget your dependent position.', 'I don ll run away. I t bear it; I can', 'Go away from me, go away from me! When my temper comes upon me, I am mad. I know I might keep it off if I only tried hard enough, and sometimes I do try hard enough, and at other times I don t. What have I said! I knew when I said it, it was all lies. They think I am being taken care of somewhere, and have all I want. They are nothing but good to me. I love them dearly; no people could ever be kinder to a thankless creature than they always are to me. Do, do go away, for I am afraid of you. I am afraid of myself when I feel my temper coming, and I am as much afraid of you. Go away from me, and let me pray and cry myself better!', 'Thank Heaven!', 'Heaven forgive me, and those who trained me. How I have hated this day!', 'Beg pardon, sir, Wish see bed-room?', 'Yes. I have just made up my mind to do it.', 'Chaymaid! Gelen box num seven wish see room!', 'Stay! I was not thinking of what I said; I answered mechanically. I am not going to sleep here. I am going home.', 'Deed, sir? Chaymaid! Gelen box num seven, not go sleep here, gome.', 'Nothing changed, Dark and miserable as ever. A light in my mother', 'Your figure is filled out, and set, but you don', 'How is my mother?', 'She is as she always is now. Keeps her room when not actually bedridden, and hasn', 'I doubt if your mother will approve of your coming home on the Sabbath, Arthur,', 'You wouldn', 'Oh! I? I? I am not the master. It t pretend to stand between your mother and you.', 'Will you tell her that I have come home?', 'Yes, Arthur, yes. Oh, to be sure! I t find the room changed.', 'How weak am I, that I could shed tears at this reception! I, who have never experienced anything else; who have never expected anything else.', 'Mother, this is a change from your old active habits.', 'The world has narrowed to these dimensions, Arthur, It is well for me that I never set my heart upon its hollow vanities.', 'Do you never leave your room, mother?', 'What with my rheumatic affection, and what with its attendant debility or nervous weakness--names are of no matter now--I have lost the use of my limbs. I never leave my room. I have not been outside this door for--tell him for how long,', 'A dozen year next Christmas,', 'Is that Affery?', 'I am able, I am able to attend to my business duties, and I am thankful for the privilege. It is a great privilege. But no more of business on this day. It is a bad night, is it not?', 'Yes, mother.', 'Does it snow?', 'Snow, mother? And we only yet in September?', 'All seasons are alike to me, I know nothing of summer and winter, shut up here. The Lord has been pleased to put me beyond all that.', 'I see that you received the packet I sent you on my father', 'You see.', 'I never knew my father to show so much anxiety on any subject, as that his watch should be sent straight to you.', 'I keep it here as a remembrance of your father.', 'It was not until the last, that he expressed the wish; when he could only put his hand upon it, and very indistinctly say to me "your mother." A moment before, I thought him wandering in his mind, as he had been for many hours--I think he had no consciousness of pain in his short illness--when I saw him turn himself in his bed and try to open it.', 'Was your father, then, not wandering in his mind when he tried to open it?', 'No. He was quite sensible at that time.', 'After my father', 'Good night, Arthur. Affery will see to your accommodation. Only touch me, for my hand is tender.', 'No, Affery, no supper.', 'You shall if you like, There s partridge in the larder--her first this year; say the word and I', 'Have something to drink, then, you shall have some of her bottle of port, if you like. I', 'It  said the old woman, bending over him to whisper,  em, you should be. You t you?', 'Yes, yes.', 'Well then, don re clever, Arthur, an', 'Then stand up against them! She s_ a clever one--oh, he t, he does!', 'Your husband does?', 'Does? It makes me shake from head to foot, to hear him give it her. My husband, Jeremiah Flintwinch, can conquer even your mother. What can he be but a clever one to do that!', 'Now, Affery, now, woman, what are you doing? Can', 'Very well, then, make his bed. Stir yourself.', 'You  said Jeremiah.  s death--which she suspects, though we have left it to you to tell her--won', 'I have given up everything in life for the business, and the time came for me to give up that.', 'Good! Very good! only don ve done with such work.', 'You will never be asked to begin it again for me, Jeremiah.', 'Good. I s enough--as your mother says--and more than enough of such matters on a Sabbath night. Affery, woman, have you found what you want yet?', 'Affery, you were not married when I went away.', 'How did it happen?', 'Why, Jeremiah, o', 'Of course he proposed it, but how did it all come about? I should have thought that neither of you would have married; least of all should I have thought of your marrying each other.', 'No more should I,', 'That', 'Never begun to think otherwise at all,', 'How could you help yourself from being married!', 'O  said Mrs Flintwinch.   mine. I d got something to do, without thinking, indeed! She kept me to it (as well as he) when she could go about, and she could go about then.', 'Well?', 'Well? That s the use of considering? If them two clever ones have made up their minds to it, what', 'Was it my mother', 'The Lord bless you, Arthur, and forgive me the wish! If they hadn ant likely that he would, after living in the house with me and ordering me about for as many years as he re going to take it," he said. "Take it?" I says. "Jere-_mi_-ah?" Oh! he', 're going to take it," he said. "Take it?" I says. "Jere-_mi_-ah?" Oh! he', 're going to take it," he said. "Take it?" I says. "Jere-_mi_-ah?" Oh! he', 'Well?', 'Well? How could I help myself? He said to me, "Affery, you and me must be married, and I s failing in health, and she ll be nobody about now but ourselves when we s of my opinion," he said, "so if you ll get it over."', 'Well?', 'Well? I think so! I sits me down and says it. Well!--Jeremiah then says to me, "As to banns, next Sunday being the third time of asking (for I em up a fortnight), is my reason for naming Monday. She ll find you prepared, Affery." That same day she spoke to me, and she said, "So, Affery, I understand that you and Jeremiah are going to be married. I am glad of it, and so are you, with reason. It is a very good thing for you, and very welcome under the circumstances to me. He is a sensible man, and a trustworthy man, and a persevering man, and a pious man." What could I say when it had come to that? Why, if it had been--a smothering instead of a wedding, I couldn', 'In good faith, I believe so.', 'And so you may, Arthur.', 'Affery, what girl was that in my mother', 'Girl?', 'It was a girl, surely, whom I saw near you--almost hidden in the dark corner?', 'Oh! She? Little Dorrit? _She_ s a whim of--hers. But there ll be bound.', 'I suffered enough from my mother', 'Have you got another?', 'No.', 'Here s well to do now, and a widow. And if you like to have her, why you can.', 'And how do you know that, Affery?', 'Them two clever ones have been speaking about it.--There', 'Who s the matter?', 'You have been asleep, two hours. You said you would be rested enough if you had a short nap.', 'I have had a short nap,', 'Half-past two o  muttered Jeremiah.  s your hat? Where s the box?', 'All here, Stop a minute. Now give me the sleeve--not that sleeve, the other one. Ha! I  Mr Flintwinch had pulled him into his coat with vehement energy. ', 'Drink it! and--choke yourself, I was going to say--but go, I mean.', 'Her port-wine, I believe? Her health.', 'Your health!', 'His health!', 'And all friends round St Paul', 'Why, Affery, woman--Affery! What have you been dreaming of? Wake up, wake up! What', 'The--the matter, Jeremiah?', 'Why, Affery, woman--Affery! You have been getting out of bed in your sleep, my dear! I come up, after having fallen asleep myself, below, and find you in your wrapper here, with the nightmare. Affery, woman, if you ever have a dream of this sort again, it ll give you such a dose, old woman--such a dose!', 'Are you any better this morning, mother?', 'Shall I speak of our affairs, mother? Are you inclined to enter upon business?', 'Am I inclined, Arthur? Rather, are you? Your father has been dead a year and more. I have been at your disposal, and waiting your pleasure, ever since.', 'There was much to arrange before I could leave; and when I did leave, I travelled a little for rest and relief.', 'For rest and relief.', 'Besides, mother, you being sole executrix, and having the direction and management of the estate, there remained little business, or I might say none, that I could transact, until you had had time to arrange matters to your satisfaction.', 'The accounts are made out, I have them here. The vouchers have all been examined and passed. You can inspect them when you like, Arthur; now, if you please.', 'It is quite enough, mother, to know that the business is completed. Shall I proceed then?', 'Why not?', 'Mother, our House has done less and less for some years past, and our dealings have been progressively on the decline. We have never shown much confidence, or invited much; we have attached no people to us; the track we have kept is not the track of the time; and we have been left far behind. I need not dwell on this to you, mother. You know it necessarily.', 'I know what you mean,', 'Even this old house in which we speak, is an instance of what I say. In my father s time before him, it was a place of business--really a place of business, and business resort. Now, it is a mere anomaly and incongruity here, out of date and out of purpose. All our consignments have long been made to Rovinghams s resources, your judgment and watchfulness have been actively exerted, still those qualities would have influenced my father', 'Do you consider, that a house serves no purpose, Arthur, in sheltering your infirm and afflicted--justly infirm and righteously afflicted--mother?', 'I was speaking only of business purposes.', 'With what object?', 'I am coming to it.', 'I foresee, what it is. But the Lord forbid that I should repine under any visitation. In my sinfulness I merit bitter disappointment, and I accept it.', 'Mother, I grieve to hear you speak like this, though I have had my apprehensions that you would--', 'You knew I would. You knew _me_,', 'You have anticipated, mother, that I decide for my part, to abandon the business. I have done with it. I will not take upon myself to advise you; you will continue it, I see. If I had any influence with you, I would simply use it to soften your judgment of me in causing you this disappointment: to represent to you that I have lived the half of a long term of life, and have never before set my own will against yours. I cannot say that I have been able to conform myself, in heart and spirit, to your rules; I cannot say that I believe my forty years have been profitable or pleasant to myself, or any one; but I have habitually submitted, and I only ask you to remember it.', 'Have you finished, Arthur, or have you anything more to say to me? I think there can be nothing else. You have been short, but full of matter!', 'Mother, I have yet something more to say. It has been upon my mind, night and day, this long time. It is far more difficult to say than what I have said. That concerned myself; this concerns us all.', 'Us all! Who are us all?', 'Yourself, myself, my dead father.', 'You knew my father infinitely better than I ever knew him; and his reserve with me yielded to you. You were much the stronger, mother, and directed him. As a child, I knew it as well as I know it now. I knew that your ascendancy over him was the cause of his going to China to take care of the business there, while you took care of it here (though I do not even now know whether these were really terms of separation that you agreed upon); and that it was your will that I should remain with you until I was twenty, and then go to him as I did. You will not be offended by my recalling this, after twenty years?', 'I am waiting to hear why you recall it.', 'I want to ask you, mother, whether it ever occurred to you to suspect--', '--that he had any secret remembrance which caused him trouble of mind--remorse? Whether you ever observed anything in his conduct suggesting that; or ever spoke to him upon it, or ever heard him hint at such a thing?', 'I do not understand what kind of secret remembrance you mean to infer that your father was a prey to, You speak so mysteriously.', 'Is it possible, mother, is it possible, mother, that he had unhappily wronged any one, and made no reparation?', 'I am deeply sensible, mother, that if this thought has never at any time flashed upon you, it must seem cruel and unnatural in me, even in this confidence, to breathe it. But I cannot shake it off. Time and change (I have tried both before breaking silence) do nothing to wear it out.  Remember, I was with my father. Remember, I saw his face when he gave the watch into my keeping, and struggled to express that he sent it as a token you would understand, to you. Remember, I saw him at the last with the pencil in his failing hand, trying to write some word for you to read, but to which he could give no shape. The more remote and cruel this vague suspicion that I have, the stronger the circumstances that could give it any semblance of probability to me. For Heaven', 'In grasping at money and in driving hard bargains--I have begun, and I must speak of such things now, mother--some one may have been grievously deceived, injured, ruined. You were the moving power of all this machinery before my birth; your stronger spirit has been infused into all my father', 'If reparation can be made to any one, if restitution can be made to any one, let us know it and make it. Nay, mother, if within my means, let _me_ make it. I have seen so little happiness come of money; it has brought within my knowledge so little peace to this house, or to any one belonging to it, that it is worth less to me than to another. It can buy me nothing that will not be a reproach and misery to me, if I am haunted by a suspicion that it darkened my father', 'Send Flintwinch here!', 'Flintwinch! look at my son. Look at him!', 'Well, I _am_ looking at him,', 'In the very hour of his return almost--before the shoe upon his foot is dry--he asperses his father s transactions through a lifetime! Has misgivings that the goods of this world which we have painfully got together early and late, with wear and tear and toil and self-denial, are so much plunder; and asks to whom they shall be given up, as reparation and restitution!', 'Reparation! Yes, truly! It is easy for him to talk of reparation, fresh from journeying and junketing in foreign lands, and living a life of vanity and pleasure. But let him look at me, in prison, and in bonds here. I endure without murmuring, because it is appointed that I shall so make reparation for my sins. Reparation! Is there none in this room? Has there been none here this fifteen years?', 'Flintwinch, give me that book!', 'In the days of old, Arthur, treated of in this commentary, there were pious men, beloved of the Lord, who would have cursed their sons for less than this: who would have sent them forth, and sent whole nations forth, if such had supported them, to be avoided of God and man, and perish, down to the baby at the breast. But I only tell you that if you ever renew that theme with me, I will renounce you; I will so dismiss you through that doorway, that you had better have been motherless from your cradle. I will never see or know you more. And if, after all, you were to come into this darkened room to look upon me lying dead, my body should bleed, if I could make it, when you came near me.', 'Now, premising that I', 'Take your version of it, from my mother. Let it rest there. What I have said, was said to my mother only.', 'Oh! From your mother? Take it from your mother? Well! But your mother mentioned that you had been suspecting your father. That', 'Enough, Let no more be said about this.', 'Yes, but stop a bit, stop a bit, Let us see how we stand. Have you told Mr Arthur that he mustn s door? That he has no right to do it? That he has no ground to go upon?', 'I tell him so now.', 'Ah! Exactly, You tell him so now. You hadn s right! You know I stood between you and his father so long, that it seems as if death had made no difference, and I was still standing between you. So I will, and so in fairness I require to have that plainly put forward. Arthur, you please to hear that you have no right to mistrust your father, and have no ground to go upon.', 'He has relinquished it.', 'In favour of nobody, I suppose?', 'And if any pleasure, could arise for me out of the disappointment of my expectations that my son, in the prime of his life, would infuse new youth and strength into it, and make it of great profit and power, it would be in advancing an old and faithful servant. Jeremiah, the captain deserts the ship, but you and I will sink or float with it.', 'Now, Affery, woman, You hadn s bed when I was up there last. Stir yourself. Bustle.', 'Do you think, sir, that she will be very much shocked, if she should come to the gate to-morrow morning?', 'She is very delicate and inexperienced indeed.', 'That, is agen her.', 'She is so little used to go out alone, that I am at a loss to think how she will ever make her way here, if she walks.', 'P  quoth the turnkey,  ll take a ackney coach.', 'Perhaps. I hope she will. She may not think of it.', 'Or p  said the turnkey, offering his suggestions from the the top of his well-worn wooden stool, as he might have offered them to a child for whose weakness he felt a compassion,  raps she', 'She has no brother or sister.', 'Niece, nevy, cousin, serwant, young  em,', 'I fear--I hope it is not against the rules--that she will bring the children.', 'The children? And the rules? Why, lord set you up like a corner pin, we lar playground o em. How many a you got?', 'Two,', 'Got a room now; haven', 'Yes, I have got a very good room.', 'Any little sticks a coming to furnish it?', 'I expect a few necessary articles of furniture to be delivered by the carrier, this afternoon.', 'Missis and little ', 'Why, yes, we think it better that we should not be scattered, even for a few weeks.', 'Even for a few weeks, _of_ course,', 'Out? _he_', 'As anybody might a known she would be,', 'We intended, that she should go to a country lodging only to-morrow. What am I to do! Oh, good heaven, what am I to do!', 'Don  responded the practical turnkey, taking him by the elbow, ', 'Come in!', 'Doctor, here s wife in want of you without a minute', 'The flies trouble you, don  said Mrs Bangham.  raps they s, the waggon-stables, and the paunch trade, the Marshalsea flies gets very large. P re sent as a consolation, if we only know t to be expected; you re better, and you know it, don s right! And to think of a sweet little cherub being born inside the lock! Now ain t _that_ something to carry you through it pleasant? Why, we ain t name the time when. And you a crying too? You! Making yourself so famous! With the flies a falling into the gallipots by fifties! And everything a going on so well! And here if there ain  said Mrs Bangham as the door opened,  t your dear gentleman along with Dr Haggage! And now indeed we _are_ complete, I _think_!', 'Mrs Bangham, go outside and fetch a little brandy, or we shall have you giving in.', 'go outside and fetch a little brandy, or we shall have you giving in.', 'Thank you, sir. But none on my accounts,', 'Mrs Bangham, I am in professional attendance on this lady, and don ll break down.', 'You  said Mrs Bangham, rising.  t be the worse, for you look but poorly, sir.', 'Mrs Bangham, I am not your business, thank you, but you are mine. Never you mind _me_, if you please. What you have got to do, is, to do as you are told, and to go and get what I bid you.', 'A very nice little girl indeed, little, but well-formed. Halloa, Mrs Bangham! You am, this minute, and fetch a little more brandy, or we shall have you in hysterics.', 'Thank you, thank you. Your good lady is quite composed. Doing charmingly.', 'I am very happy and very thankful to know it, though I little thought once, that--', 'That a child would be born to you in a place like this? Bah, bah, sir, what does it signify? A little more elbow-room is all we want here. We are quiet here; we don s no knocker here, sir, to be hammered at by creditors and bring a man s at home, and to say he s freedom, sir, it s practice at home and abroad, on a march, and aboard ship, and I t know that I have ever pursued it under such quiet circumstances as here this day. Elsewhere, people are restless, worried, hurried about, anxious respecting one thing, anxious respecting another. Nothing of the kind here, sir. We have done all that--we know the worst of it; we have got to the bottom, we can s the word for it. Peace.', 'Why, I  said his friend the turnkey, one day.  ll be the oldest inhabitant soon. The Marshalsea wouldn', 'You t be like the Marshalsea now, without you and your family.', 'Brought up as a gentleman, he was, if ever a man was. Ed s house once to try a new piano for him. Played it, I understand, like one o ve had a Frenchman here in his time, and it ve had an Italian here in his time, and he shut _him_ up in about half a minute. You t say you won ve mentioned, you must come to the Marshalsea.', 'You and me, s night when the lodge, with a bright fire in it, was pretty full of company,  t here myself above seven year before you. I shan m off the lock for good and all, you', 'With the compliments of a collegian taking leave.', 'I forgot to leave this, for the Father of the Marshalsea.', 'My good sir, he is infinitely obliged to you.', 'God bless you, sir,', 'And you,', 'It ain  said the Plasterer, putting a little pile of halfpence in his hand,  s well meant.', 'How dare you!', 'Bless your soul, sir, I did indeed. I em do, I fancy.', 'What would you do?', 'I', 'Give me the money again, and I', 'If I live a week you shall.', 'By rights, I ought to be her godfather.', 'Oh! _I_ don  replied the turnkey,  t.', 'Thinking of the fields, ain', 'ain', 'Where are they?', 'Why, they  said the turnkey, with a vague flourish of his key. ', 'Does anybody open them, and shut them? Are they locked?', 'Are they very pretty, Bob?', 'Lovely. Full of flowers. There s daisies, and there --the turnkey hesitated, being short of floral nomenclature-- s dandelions, and all manner of games.', 'Is it very pleasant to be there, Bob?', 'Prime,', 'Was father ever there?', 'Hem! O yes, he was there, sometimes.', 'Is he sorry not to be there now?', 'N-not particular,', 'Nor any of the people? O are you quite sure and certain, Bob?', 'Supposing, s waistcoat; ', 'Settle it strictly on herself,', 'But look here, Supposing she had, say a brother, say a father, say a husband, who would be likely to make a grab at that property when she came into it--how about that?', 'It would be settled on herself, and they would have no more legal claim on it than you,', 'Stop a bit, Supposing she was tender-hearted, and they came over her. Where', 'If you please, I was born here, sir.', 'Oh! You are the young lady, are you?', 'Yes, sir.', 'And what can I do for you?', 'Nothing for me, sir, thank you, but if, while you stay here, you could be so kind as to teach my sister cheap--', 'My child, I  said the dancing-master, shutting up the bag. He was as good-natured a dancing-master as ever danced to the Insolvent Court, and he kept his word. The sister was so apt a pupil, and the dancing-master had such abundant leisure to bestow upon her (for it took him a matter of ten weeks to set to his creditors, lead off, turn the Commissioners, and right and left back to his professional pursuits), that wonderful progress was made. Indeed the dancing-master was so proud of it, and so wishful to display it before he left to a few select friends among the collegians, that at six o', 'I beg your pardon, ma  she said, looking timidly round the door of the milliner, whom she found in tears and in bed: ', 'Oh! _You_ are the child, are you?', 'Yes, ma', 'I am sorry I haven', 'It am. If you please I want to learn needle-work.', 'Why should you do that, with me before you? It has not done me much good.', 'Nothing--whatever it is--seems to have done anybody much good who comes here, but I want to learn just the same.', 'I am afraid you are so weak, you see,', 'I don am.', 'And you are so very, very little, you see,', 'Yes, I am afraid I am very little indeed,', 'Fanny is not going to live with us just now, father. She will be here a good deal in the day, but she is going to live outside with uncle.', 'You surprise me. Why?', 'I think uncle wants a companion, father. He should be attended to, and looked after.', 'A companion? He passes much of his time here. And you attend to him and look after him, Amy, a great deal more than ever your sister will. You all go out so much; you all go out so much.', 'But we are always glad to come home, father; now, are we not? And as to Fanny, perhaps besides keeping uncle company and taking care of him, it may be as well for her not quite to live here, always. She was not born here as I was, you know, father.', 'Well, Amy, well. I don s natural I suppose that Fanny should prefer to be outside, and even that you often should, too. So, you and Fanny and your uncle, my dear, shall have your own way. Good, good. I t mind me.', 'Dear Bob, what is to become of poor Tip?', 'Well, my dear, something ought to be done with him. Suppose I try and get him into the law?', 'That would be so good of you, Bob!', 'Not going back again?', 'I am so tired of it, that I have cut it.', 'God bless you, dear Tip. Don', 'All right!', 'Amy, I have got a situation.', 'Have you really and truly, Tip?', 'All right. I shall do now. You needn', 'What is it, Tip?', 'Why, you know Slingo by sight?', 'Not the man they call the dealer?', 'That ll be out on Monday, and he', 'What is he a dealer in, Tip?', 'Horses. All right! I shall do now, Amy.', 'I am afraid, Amy, you', 'I am very sorry to hear you say so, Tip. Have you come back?', 'Why--yes.', 'Not expecting this time that what you had found would answer very well, I am less surprised and sorry than I might have been, Tip.', 'Ah! But that', 'Not the worst of it?', 'Don t_ look so startled--I have come back in what I may call a new way. I am off the volunteer list altogether. I am in now, as one of the regulars.', 'Oh! Don t, don', 'Well, I don  he returned in a reluctant tone;  t understand me without my saying it, what am I to do? I am in for forty pound odd.', 'Pray, sir, what is this place?', 'Ay! This place? This is the Marshalsea, sir.', 'The debtors', 'Sir, the debtors', 'I beg your pardon, but will you allow me to ask you another question? Can any one go in here?', 'Any one can _go in_, but it is not every one who can go out.', 'Pardon me once more. Are you familiar with the place?', 'Sir, I am.', 'I am.', 'I beg you to excuse me. I am not impertinently curious, but have a good object. Do you know the name of Dorrit here?', 'My name, sir, is Dorrit.', 'I do assure you that I am, and do entreat you to believe that I am, in plain earnest.', 'I know very little of the world, sir, I am merely passing on, like the shadow over the sun-dial. It would be worth no man s child. My brother is William Dorrit; I am Frederick. You say you have seen her at your mother', 'My brother, has been here many years; and much that happens even among ourselves, out of doors, is kept from him for reasons that I needn s working at her needle. Be so good as to say nothing that goes beyond what is said among us. If you keep within our bounds, you cannot well be wrong. Now! Come and see.', 'I found this gentleman, Mr Clennam, William, son of Amy', 'I hope, that my respect for your daughter may explain and justify my desire to be presented to you, sir.', 'Mr Clennam, you do me honour. You are welcome, sir; Frederick, a chair. Pray sit down, Mr Clennam.', 'You are welcome to the Marshalsea, sir. I have welcomed many gentlemen to these walls. Perhaps you are aware--my daughter Amy may have mentioned that I am the Father of this place.', 'I--so I have understood,', 'You know, I dare say, that my daughter Amy was born here. A good girl, sir, a dear girl, and long a comfort and support to me. Amy, my dear, put this dish on; Mr Clennam will excuse the primitive customs to which we are reduced here. Is it a compliment to ask you if you would do me the honour, sir, to--', 'Thank you, Not a morsel.', 'She is walking with Tip.', 'Tip--as you may know--is my son, Mr Clennam. He has been a little wild, and difficult to settle, but his introduction to the world was rather a little adverse. Your first visit here, sir?', 'My first.', 'You could hardly have been here since your boyhood without my knowledge. It very seldom happens that anybody--of any pretensions--any pretensions--comes here without being presented to me.', 'As many as forty or fifty in a day have been introduced to my brother,', 'Yes! We have even exceeded that number. On a fine Sunday in term time, it is quite a Levee--quite a Levee. Amy, my dear, I have been trying half the day to remember the name of the gentleman from Camberwell who was introduced to me last Christmas week by that agreeable coal-merchant who was remanded for six months.', 'I don', 'Frederick, do _you_ remember his name?', 'I mean, the gentleman who did that handsome action with so much delicacy. Ha! Tush! The name has quite escaped me. Mr Clennam, as I have happened to mention handsome and delicate action, you may like, perhaps, to know what it was.', 'Very much,', 'It is so generous, and shows so much fine feeling, that it is almost a duty to mention it. I said at the time that I always would mention it on every suitable occasion, without regard to personal sensitiveness. A--well--a--it', 'Sometimes, sometimes--hem--it takes one shape and sometimes another; but it is generally--ha--Money. And it is, I cannot but confess it, it is too often--hem--acceptable. This gentleman that I refer to, was presented to me, Mr Clennam, in a manner highly gratifying to my feelings, and conversed not only with great politeness, but with great--ahem--information. It appeared from his conversation that he had a garden, though he was delicate of mentioning it at first, as gardens are--hem--are not accessible to me. But it came out, through my admiring a very fine cluster of geranium--beautiful cluster of geranium to be sure--which he had brought from his conservatory. On my taking notice of its rich colour, he showed me a piece of paper round it, on which was written, "For the Father of the Marshalsea," and presented it to me. But this was--hem--not all. He made a particular request, on taking leave, that I would remove the paper in half an hour. I--ha--I did so; and I found that it contained--ahem--two guineas. I assure you, Mr Clennam, I have received--hem--Testimonials in many ways, and of many degrees of value, and they have always been--ha--unfortunately acceptable; but I never was more pleased than with this--ahem--this particular Testimonial.', 'Mr Clennam, Fanny. My eldest daughter and my son, Mr Clennam. The bell is a signal for visitors to retire, and so they have come to say good night; but there is plenty of time, plenty of time. Girls, Mr Clennam will excuse any household business you may have together. He knows, I dare say, that I have but one room here.', 'I only want my clean dress from Amy, father,', 'And I my clothes,', 'Come, Fanny, come, Fanny, the lock, child, the lock!', 'Allow me, to see you down-stairs.', 'Mr Clennam, I am deeply, deeply--', 'Pray forgive me, for speaking to you here; pray forgive me for coming here at all! I followed you to-night. I did so, that I might endeavour to render you and your family some service. You know the terms on which I and my mother are, and may not be surprised that I have preserved our distant relations at her house, lest I should unintentionally make her jealous, or resentful, or do you any injury in her estimation. What I have seen here, in this short time, has greatly increased my heartfelt wish to be a friend to you. It would recompense me for much disappointment if I could hope to gain your confidence.', 'You are very good, sir. You speak very earnestly to me. But I--but I wish you had not watched me.', 'Mrs Clennam has been of great service to me; I don', 'Let me ask you one question before I leave. Have you known my mother long?', 'I think two years, sir,--The bell has stopped.', 'How did you know her first? Did she send here for you?', 'No. She does not even know that I live here. We have a friend, father and I--a poor labouring man, but the best of friends--and I wrote out that I wished to do needlework, and gave his address. And he got what I wrote out displayed at a few places where it cost nothing, and Mrs Clennam found me that way, and sent for me. The gate will be locked, sir!', 'Caught, eh? You won s you, is it, Mr Clennam?', 'You  observed Tip; ', 'But you are locked in too,', 'I believe I am! About! But not in your way. I belong to the shop, only my sister has a theory that our governor must never know it. I don', 'Can I get any shelter? What had I better do?', 'We had better get hold of Amy first of all,', 'I would rather walk about all night--it', 'You needn t mind paying for a bed. If you don ll make you up one on the Snuggery table, under the circumstances. If you ll introduce you there.', 'I don', 'The governor sleeps up in the room, and she has a lodging at the turnkey  said Tip, pointing out the doorway into which she had retired. ', 'Do you know Miss Dorrit?', 'Dorrit? _Mr_ Dorrit? Third bell and one knock.', '_Mr_ Dorrit? Third bell and one knock.', 'Ha! you were shut in last night?', 'Yes, Mr Dorrit. I hope to meet your niece here presently.', 'Oh! Out of my brother', 'Thank you.', 'What did you think of my brother, sir?', 'I was glad, to find him so well and cheerful.', 'Ha! yes, yes, yes, yes, yes!', 'Amy, Mr Clennam. What do you think of her?', 'I am much impressed, Mr Dorrit, by all that I have seen of her and thought of her.', 'My brother would have been quite lost without Amy, We should all have been lost without Amy. She is a very good girl, Amy. She does her duty.', 'Mr Clennam, Amy, has been expecting you some time.', 'I took the liberty of sending you a message.', 'I received the message, sir.', 'Are you going to my mother', 'Not to-day, sir. I am not wanted to-day.', 'Will you allow Me to walk a little way in whatever direction you may be going? I can then speak to you as we walk, both without detaining you here, and without intruding longer here myself.', 'I am sorry to hear you were so inconvenienced last night, sir, as to be locked in. It was very unfortunate.', 'Oh yes! she believed there were excellent beds at the coffee-house.', 'I believe it is very expensive, but my father has told me that quite beautiful dinners may be got there. And wine,', 'Were you ever there?', 'Oh no! Only into the kitchen to fetch hot water.', 'I asked you last night, how you had become acquainted with my mother. Did you ever hear her name before she sent for you?', 'No, sir.', 'Do you think your father ever did?', 'No, sir.', 'I have a reason for asking, which I cannot very well explain; but you must, on no account, suppose it to be of a nature to cause you the least alarm or anxiety. Quite the reverse. And you think that at no time of your father', 'No, sir.', 'Let me put you in a coach, my poor child.', 'You spoke so feelingly to me last night, sir, and I found afterwards that you had been so generous to my father, that I could not resist your message, if it was only to thank you; especially as I wished very much to say to you--', 'To say to me--?', 'That I hope you will not misunderstand my father. Don', 'My thoughts will never be unjust or harsh towards him, believe me.', 'Not, not that he has anything to be ashamed of for himself, or that I have anything to be ashamed of for him. He only requires to be understood. I only ask for him that his life may be fairly remembered. All that he said was quite true. It all happened just as he related it. He is very much respected. Everybody who comes in, is glad to know him. He is more courted than anyone else. He is far more thought of than the Marshal is.', 'It is often said that his manners are a true gentleman', 'If I have found it best to conceal where my home is, it is not because I am ashamed of him. God forbid! Nor am I so much ashamed of the place itself as might be supposed. People are not bad because they come there. I have known numbers of good, persevering, honest people come there through misfortune. They are almost all kind-hearted to one another. And it would be ungrateful indeed in me, to forget that I have had many quiet, comfortable hours there; that I had an excellent friend there when I was quite a baby, who was very very fond of me; that I have been taught there, and have worked there, and have slept soundly there. I think it would be almost cowardly and cruel not to have some little attachment for it, after all this.', 'I feel permitted now, to ask you a little more concerning your father. Has he many creditors?', 'Oh! a great number.', 'I mean detaining creditors, who keep him where he is?', 'Oh yes! a great number.', 'Can you tell me--I can get the information, no doubt, elsewhere, if you cannot--who is the most influential of them?', 'It can do no harm, if I see this Mr Tite Barnacle.', 'Even if it could be done, and it never can be done now--where could father live, or how could he live? I have often thought that if such a change could come, it might be anything but a service to him now. People might not think so well of him outside as they do there. He might not be so gently dealt with outside as he is there. He might not be so fit himself for the life outside as he is for that.', 'It would be a new distress to him even to know that I earn a little money, and that Fanny earns a little money. He is so anxious about us, you see, feeling helplessly shut up there. Such a good, good father!', 'You would be glad to have your brother set at liberty?', 'Oh very, very glad, sir!', 'Well, we will hope for him at least. You told me last night of a friend you had?', 'There is one friend! As I take you back--you are going back?', 'Oh yes! going straight home.', '--As I take you back, let me ask you to persuade yourself that you have another friend. I make no professions, and say no more.', 'You are truly kind to me, sir. I am sure I need no more.', 'Oh, Maggy, what a clumsy child you are!', 'This is Maggy, sir.', 'Maggy, sir, Little mother!', 'She is the grand-daughter--', 'Grand-daughter,', 'Of my old nurse, who has been dead a long time. Maggy, how old are you?', 'Ten, mother,', 'You can', 'Good _she_ is,', 'Or how clever, She goes on errands as well as any one. And is as trustworthy as the Bank of England. She earns her own living entirely. Entirely, sir! Really does!', 'What is her history?', 'Think of that, Maggy? A gentleman from thousands of miles away, wanting to know your history!', '_My_ history? Little mother.', 'She means me, she is very much attached to me. Her old grandmother was not so kind to her as she should have been; was she, Maggy?', 'Broom-handles and pokers.', 'When Maggy was ten years old, she had a bad fever, sir, and she has never grown any older ever since.', 'Ten years old, But what a nice hospital! So comfortable, wasn nly place!', 'She had never been at peace before, sir, and she always runs off upon that.', 'Such beds there is there! Such lemonades! Such oranges! Such d T it a delightful place to go and stop at!', 'So Maggy stopped there as long as she could, s story; the tone designed for Maggy and at last, when she could stop there no longer, she came out. Then, because she was never to be more than ten years old, however long she lived--', 'However long she lived,', '--And because she was very weak; indeed was so weak that when she began to laugh she couldn', '--Her grandmother did not know what to do with her, and for some years was very unkind to her indeed. At length, in course of time, Maggy began to take pains to improve herself, and to be very attentive and very industrious; and by degrees was allowed to come in and out as often as she liked, and got enough to do to support herself, and does support herself. And that, is Maggy', 'Oh, I say. Look here! My father t be in the way to-day, Is this anything that I can do?', 'You are very good, I wish however to see Mr Barnacle.', 'But I say. Look here! You haven', 'No, That is what I wish to have.', 'But I say. Look here! Is this public business?', 'Is it, s brown face, ', 'anything about--Tonnage--or that sort of thing?', 'No, it is nothing about tonnage.', 'Then look here. Is it private business?', 'I really am not sure. It relates to a Mr Dorrit.', 'Look here, I tell you what! You had better call at our house, if you are going that way. Twenty-four, Mews Street, Grosvenor Square. My father', 'Thank you. I will call there now. Good morning.', 'You are quite sure, that it', 'Quite sure.', 'Be so good as to give that card to Mr Tite Barnacle, and to say that I have just now seen the younger Mr Barnacle, who recommended me to call here.', 'Mr Clennam? Be seated.', 'You have called on me, I believe, at the Circumlocution-- Office.', 'I have taken that liberty.', 'Allow me to observe that I have been for some years in China, am quite a stranger at home, and have no personal motive or interest in the inquiry I am about to make.', 'I have found a debtor in the Marshalsea Prison of the name of Dorrit, who has been there many years. I wish to investigate his confused affairs so far as to ascertain whether it may not be possible, after this lapse of time, to ameliorate his unhappy condition. The name of Mr Tite Barnacle has been mentioned to me as representing some highly influential interest among his creditors. Am I correctly informed?', 'On behalf of the Crown, may I ask, or as private individual?', 'The Circumlocution Department, sir, may have possibly recommended--possibly--I cannot say--that some public claim against the insolvent estate of a firm or copartnership to which this person may have belonged, should be enforced. The question may have been, in the course of official business, referred to the Circumlocution Department for its consideration. The Department may have either originated, or confirmed, a Minute making that recommendation.', 'I assume this to be the case, then.', 'The Circumlocution Department, is not responsible for any gentleman', 'May I inquire how I can obtain official information as to the real state of the case?', 'It is competent, to any member of the--Public, to memorialise the Circumlocution Department. Such formalities as are required to be observed in so doing, may be known on application to the proper branch of that Department.', 'to memorialise the Circumlocution Department. Such formalities as are required to be observed in so doing, may be known on application to the proper branch of that Department.', 'Which is the proper branch?', 'I must refer you, to the Department itself for a formal answer to that inquiry.', 'Excuse my mentioning--', 'The Department is accessible to the--Public, if the--Public approaches it according to the official forms; if the--Public does not approach it according to the official forms, the--Public has itself to blame.', 'I say. Look here. You stick to us in a devil of a manner,', 'I want to know--', 'Look here. Upon my soul you mustn', 'I want to know, the precise nature of the claim of the Crown against a prisoner for debt, named Dorrit.', 'I say. Look here. You really are going it at a great pace, you know. Egad, you haven', 'I want to know,', 'I have now ascertained that it is public business, and I want to know', 'Well, I tell you what. Look here. You had better try the Secretarial Department, Jenkinson, Mr Wobbler!', 'Jenkinson, Mr Wobbler!', 'Mr Wobbler?', 'So he went, down to his cousin s master was cleaned out.', 'Mr Wobbler?', 'Called him Lovely, Said the Dog was the perfect picture of the old aunt from whom he had expectations. Found him particularly like her when hocussed.', 'Mr Wobbler?', 'Mr Wobbler?', 'What', 'I want to know--', 'Can  observed Mr Wobbler, apparently to his lunch. ', 'Perhaps he will give me the same answer.', 'Very likely. Don', 'Shut the door after you. You', 'I want to know,', 'Not bother myself about it?', 'No! I recommend you not to bother yourself about it.', 'You can if you like. I can give you plenty of forms to fill up. Lots of  ll never go on with it,', 'em here. You can have a dozen if you like. But you', 'Would it be such hopeless work? Excuse me; I am a stranger in England.', '_I_ don  returned number four, with a frank smile.  t express an opinion about that; I only express an opinion about you. _I_ don d go on with it. However, of course, you can do as you like. I suppose there was a failure in the performance of a contract, or something of that kind, was there?', 'I really don', 'Well! That you can find out. Then you ll find out all about it there.', 'I beg your pardon. How shall I find out?', 'Why, you ll ask till they tell you. Then you ll find out) for leave to memorialise this Department. If you get it (which you may after a time), that memorial must be entered in that Department, sent to be registered in this Department, sent back to be signed by that Department, sent back to be countersigned by this Department, and then it will begin to be regularly before that Department. You', 'But surely this is not the way to do the business,', 'got up', 'When the business is regularly before that Department, whatever it is, then you can watch it from time to time through that Department. When it comes regularly before this Department, then you must watch it from time to time through this Department. We shall have to refer it right and left; and when we refer it anywhere, then you ll have to try to give it a jog. When you write to another Department about it, and then to this Department about it, and don', 'Not at all, Try the thing, and see how you like it. It will be in your power to give it up at any time, if you don', 'How are you? How d', 'And I am rejoiced to see you.', 'Thank ee!', 'Mrs Meagles and your daughter--?', 'Are as well as possible, I only wish you had come upon me in a more prepossessing condition as to coolness.', 'Whew! That', 'You have been ruffled, Mr Meagles. What is the matter?', 'Wait a bit, and I', 'As much as you please.', 'Come along then. Ah! you may well look at him. He', 'You keep with us, and I', 'Mr Clennam, will you do me the favour to look at this man? His name is Doyce, Daniel Doyce. You wouldn', 'I certainly should not.', 'No. You would not. I know you would not. You wouldn', 'No.', 'No. But he is. He is a public offender. What has he been guilty of? Murder, manslaughter, arson, forgery, swindling, house-breaking, highway robbery, larceny, conspiracy, fraud? Which should you say, now?', 'I should say, s face, ', 'You are right, But he has been ingenious, and he has been trying to turn his ingenuity to his country', 'This Doyce, is a smith and engineer. He is not in a large way, but he is well known as a very ingenious man. A dozen years ago, he perfects an invention (involving a very curious secret process) of great importance to his country and his fellow-creatures. I won t it a dozen? He is the most exasperating man in the world; he never complains!', 'Yes. Rather better than twelve years ago.', 'Rather better? you mean rather worse. Well, Mr Clennam, he addresses himself to the Government. The moment he addresses himself to the Government, he becomes a public offender! Sir, he ceases to be an innocent citizen, and becomes a culprit. He is treated from that instant as a man who has done some infernal action. He is a man to be shirked, put off, brow-beaten, sneered at, handed over by this highly-connected young or old gentleman, to that highly-connected young or old gentleman, and dodged back again; he is a man with no rights in his own time, or his own property; a mere outlaw, whom it is justifiable to get rid of anyhow; a man to be worn out by all possible means.', 'Don  cried Mr Meagles, ', 'I undoubtedly was made to feel, as if I had committed an offence. In dancing attendance at the various offices, I was always treated, more or less, as if it was a very bad offence. I have frequently found it necessary to reflect, for my own self-support, that I really had not done anything to bring myself into the Newgate Calendar, but only wanted to effect a great saving and a great improvement.', 'There! Judge whether I exaggerate. Now you', 'Upon which, as a practical man, I then and there, in that presence, took Doyce by the collar, and told him it was plain to me that he was an infamous rascal and treasonable disturber of the government peace, and took him away. I brought him out of the office door by the collar, that the very porter might know I was a practical man who appreciated the official estimate of such characters; and here we are!', 'There! now you know all about Doyce. Except, which I own does not improve my state of mind, that even now you don', 'You must have great patience, great forbearance.', 'No, I don', 'By the Lord, you have more than I have, though!', 'I don', 'Understand me! I don  he replied in his steady, planning way, and looking into the distance before him as if his grey eye were measuring it,  s recompense for a man s a certain sort of relief to know that I might have counted on this.', 'Disappointed? Yes. No doubt I am disappointed. Hurt? Yes. No doubt I am hurt. That', 'Yes. No doubt I am disappointed. Hurt? Yes. No doubt I am hurt. That', 'In England,', 'Oh! of course I mean in England. When they take their inventions into foreign countries, that s the reason why so many go there.', 'What I mean is, that however this comes to be the regular way of our government, it is its regular way. Have you ever heard of any projector or inventor who failed to find it all but inaccessible, and whom it did not discourage and ill-treat?', 'I cannot say that I ever have.', 'Have you ever known it to be beforehand in the adoption of any useful thing? Ever known it to set an example of any useful kind?', 'I am a good deal older than my friend here, and I', 'But we all three have known, I expect, a pretty many cases of its fixed determination to be miles upon miles, and years upon years, behind the rest of us; and of its being found out persisting in the use of things long superseded, even after the better things were well known and generally taken up?', 'Well then, as I know what such a metal will do at such a temperature, and such a body under such a pressure, so I may know (if I will only consider), how these great lords and gentlemen will certainly deal with such a matter as mine. I have no right to be surprised, with a head upon my shoulders, and memory in it, that I fall into the ranks with all who came before me. I ought to have let it alone. I have had warning enough, I am sure.', 'Stuff and nonsense,', 'Come, come! We shall not make this the better by being grim. Where do you think of going, Dan?', 'I shall go back to the factory,', 'Why then, we  returned Mr Meagles cheerfully.  t be deterred by its being in Bleeding Heart Yard.', 'Bleeding Heart Yard? I want to go there.', 'So much the better, Come along!', 'To the devil with this plain that has no end! To the devil with these stones that cut like knives! To the devil with this dismal darkness, wrapping itself about one with a chill! I hate you!', 'I, hungry, thirsty, weary. You, imbeciles, where the lights are yonder, eating and drinking, and warming yourselves at fires! I wish I had the sacking of your town; I would repay you, my children!', 'One can lodge here to-night, madame?', 'Perfectly!', 'Good. One can dine--sup--what you please to call it?', 'Ah, perfectly!', 'Dispatch then, madame, if you please. Something to eat, as quickly as you can; and some wine at once. I am exhausted.', 'It is very bad weather, monsieur,', 'Cursed weather.', 'And a very long road.', 'A cursed road.', 'That  said one of them, bringing a story he had been telling, to a close,  s the true reason why they said that the devil was let loose.', 'Ah Heaven, then, When the boat came up from Lyons, and brought the news that the devil was actually let loose at Marseilles, some fly-catchers swallowed it. But I? No, not I.', 'Madame, you are always right, Doubtless you were enraged against that man, madame?', 'Ay, yes, then! Naturally, yes.', 'He was a bad subject.', 'He was a wicked wretch, and well merited what he had the good fortune to escape. So much the worse.', 'Stay, madame! Let us see, It may have been his unfortunate destiny. He may have been the child of circumstances. It is always possible that he had, and has, good in him if one did but know how to find it out. Philosophical philanthropy teaches--', 'Hold there, you and your philanthropy, Listen then. I am a woman, I. I know nothing of philosophical philanthropy. But I know what I have seen, and what I have looked in the face in this world here, where I find myself. And I tell you this, my friend, that there are people (men and women both, unfortunately) who have no good in them--none. That there are people whom it is necessary to detest without compromise. That there are people who must be dealt with as enemies of the human race. That there are people who have no human heart, and who must be crushed like savage beasts and cleared out of the way. They are but few, I hope; but I have seen (in this world here where I find myself, and even at the little Break of Day) that there are such people. And I do not doubt that this man--whatever they call him, I forget his name--is one of them.', 'My faith! If your philosophical philanthropy, s soup from her husband, who appeared with it at a side door,  t worth a sou.', 'Well! let us come back to our subject. Leaving all that aside, gentlemen, it was because the man was acquitted on his trial that people said at Marseilles that the devil was let loose. That was how the phrase began to circulate, and what it meant; nothing more.', 'How do they call him? Biraud, is it not?', 'Rigaud, madame,', 'Rigaud! To be sure.', 'Pardon me, madame--that Biraud.', 'Rigaud, monsieur.', 'Rigaud. Pardon me again--has contracted your displeasure, how?', 'Ay, ay? Death of my life, that', 'All the world knows it.', 'Hah! And yet he escaped justice?', 'Monsieur, the law could not prove it against him to its satisfaction. So the law says. Nevertheless, all the world knows he did it. The people knew it so well, that they tried to tear him to pieces.', 'Being all in perfect accord with their own wives? Haha!', 'Did you mention, madame--or was it mentioned among the gentlemen--what became of him?', 'May one ask to be shown to bed, madame?', 'Death of my soul! here', 'Hush! What s I. You know me?', 'Cavalletto! Wake, boy! Rub your eyes and look at me. Not the name you used to call me--don', 'Cavalletto! Give me your hand. You know Lagnier, the gentleman. Touch the hand of a gentleman!', 'Then you were--', 'Not shaved? No. See here! as tight on as your own.', 'Look! That ll say. No matter, you shall see how soon I', 'That  cried Lagnier. ', 'Two days after you, my master.', 'How do you come here?', 'I was cautioned not to stay there, and so I left the town at once, and since then I have changed about. I have been doing odds and ends at Avignon, at Pont Esprit, at Lyons; upon the Rhone, upon the Saone.', 'And where are you going?', 'Going, my master?', 'Ay!', 'By Bacchus! I have sometimes had a thought of going to Paris, and perhaps to England.', 'Cavalletto. This is in confidence. I also am going to Paris and perhaps to England. We', 'We  repeated Lagnier. ', 'Oh, surely, surely!', 'Then you shall hear before I sleep--and in six words, for I want sleep--how I appear before you, I, Lagnier. Remember that. Not the other.', 'Altro, altro! Not Ri----', 'Death! what are you doing? Do you want me to be trampled upon and stoned? Do _you_ want to be trampled upon and stoned? You would be. You don t think it!', 'I am a man, whom society has deeply wronged since you last saw me. You know that I am sensitive and brave, and that it is my character to govern. How has society respected those qualities in me? I have been shrieked at through the streets. I have been guarded through the streets against men, and especially women, running at me armed with any weapons they could lay their hands on. I have lain in prison for security, with the place of my confinement kept a secret, lest I should be torn out of it and felled by a hundred blows. I have been carted out of Marseilles in the dead of night, and carried leagues away from it packed in straw. It has not been safe for me to go near my house; and, with a beggar', 'Even here, even in this mean drinking-shop, society pursues me. Madame defames me, and her guests defame me. I, too, a gentleman with manners and accomplishments to strike them dead! But the wrongs society has heaped upon me are treasured in this breast.', 'Put my shoes there, Hang my cloak to dry there by the door. Take my hat. And this is the bed to which society consigns me, is it? Hah. _Very_ well!', 'And this is the bed to which society consigns me, is it? Hah. _Very_ well!', 'Shaken out of destiny ll profit by it. I shall need a long rest. Let me sleep in the morning.', 'not to deceive you, he', 'Not to deceive you', 'Do you think he will be back soon, if I wait for him?', 'I have been expecting him, this half an hour, at any minute of time. Walk in, sir.', 'Not to deceive you, sir, I notice it, and I take it kind of you.', 'It ain  said Mrs Plornish. ', 'Four year just turned, sir, He _is_ a fine little fellow, ain  She tenderly hushed the baby in her arms, as she said it.  t mind my asking if it happened to be a job as you was come about, sir, would you?', 'All such things as jobs, seems to me to have gone underground, they do indeed.', 'Is it so difficult to get work?', 'Plornish finds it so, He is quite unfortunate. Really he is.', 'It  said Mrs Plornish, lifting up her eyebrows, and searching for a solution of the problem between the bars of the grate; ', 'This is Plornish, sir.', 'I came, to beg the favour of a little conversation with you on the subject of the Dorrit family.', 'I know you better, than you suppose.', 'No, I know your kind offices at second hand, but on the best authority; through Little Dorrit.--I mean, Miss Dorrit.', 'Mr Clennam, is it? Oh! I', 'And I of you,', 'Please to sit down again, Sir, and consider yourself welcome.--Why, yes, I have been on the wrong side of the Lock myself, and in that way we come to know Miss Dorrit. Me and my wife, we are well acquainted with Miss Dorrit.', 'Intimate!', 'It was her father that I got acquainted with first. And through getting acquainted with him, you see--why--I got acquainted with her,', 'I see.', 'Ah! And there s polish! There  said Plornish, lowering his voice, and speaking with a perverse admiration of what he ought to have pitied or despised,  t let him know that they work for a living. No! Dursn t!', 'Without admiring him for that, I am very sorry for him.', 'As to me, certainly Mr Dorrit is as affable with me, I am sure, as I can possibly expect. Considering the differences and distances betwixt us, more so. But it', 'True. Pray how did you introduce her at my mother', 'Miss Dorrit, came here one afternoon with a bit of writing, telling that how she wished for needlework, and asked if it would be considered any ill-conwenience in case she was to give her address here. Me and Plornish says, No, Miss Dorrit, no ill-conwenience, and she wrote it in, according. Which then me and Plornish says, Ho Miss Dorrit! Have you thought of copying it three or four times, as the way to make it known in more places than one? No, says Miss Dorrit, I have not, but I will. She copied it out according, on this table, in a sweet writing, and Plornish, he took it where he worked, having a job just then, and likewise to the landlord of the Yard; through which it was that Mrs Clennam first happened to employ Miss Dorrit.', 'The landlord of the Yard, is--', 'He is Mr Casby, by name, he is, and Pancks, he collects the rents. That, that is about what _they_ are, you may believe me or not, as you think proper.', 'Ay? Mr Casby, too! An old acquaintance of mine, long ago!', 'Mr Plornish, I trust to you, if you please, to keep my secret. If you will undertake to let the young man know that he is free, and to tell him that you were employed to compound for the debt by some one whom you are not at liberty to name, you will not only do me a service, but may do him one, and his sister also.', 'The last reason, sir, would be quite sufficient. Your wishes shall be attended to.', 'A Friend has obtained his discharge, you can say if you please. A Friend who hopes that for his sister s, he will make good use of his liberty.', 'Your wishes, sir, shall be attended to.', 'And if you will be so good, in your better knowledge of the family, as to communicate freely with me, and to point out to me any means by which you think I may be delicately and really useful to Little Dorrit, I shall feel under an obligation to you.', 'Don  returned Plornish,  ll be ekally a pleasure an a--it  Finding himself unable to balance his sentence after two efforts, Mr Plornish wisely dropped it. He took Clennam', 'The house, is as little changed as my mother', 'Oh! why, with that head, is he not a benefactor to his species! Oh! why, with that head, is he not a father to the orphan and a friend to the friendless!', 'I beg your pardon, I fear you did not hear me announced?', 'No, sir, I did not. Did you wish to see me, sir?', 'I wished to pay my respects.', 'That is your present visitor.', 'Really! Mr Clennam?', 'No other, Mr Casby.', 'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. How have you been since we met?', 'We are older, Mr Clennam,', 'We are--not younger,', 'And your respected father, is no more! I was grieved to hear it, Mr Clennam, I was grieved.', 'There was a time, when your parents and myself were not on friendly terms. There was a little family misunderstanding among us. Your respected mother was rather jealous of her son, maybe; when I say her son, I mean your worthy self, your worthy self.', 'Those times, however, are past and gone, past and gone. I do myself the pleasure of making a visit to your respected mother occasionally, and of admiring the fortitude and strength of mind with which she bears her trials, bears her trials.', 'I have heard that you were kind enough on one of those occasions, to mention Little Dorrit to my mother.', 'Little--? Dorrit? That s the name. Ah, yes, yes! You call her Little Dorrit?', 'My daughter Flora, as you may have heard probably, Mr Clennam, was married and established in life, several years ago. She had the misfortune to lose her husband when she had been married a few months. She resides with me again. She will be glad to see you, if you will permit me to let her know that you are here.', 'By all means, I should have preferred the request, if your kindness had not anticipated me.', 'Halloa!', 'What', 'I have not heard that anything is the matter,', 'Where', 'He will be here directly, if you want him.', '_I_ want him? Don', 'Oh! Very well. That', 'I am sure, I am ashamed to see Mr Clennam, I am a mere fright, I know he s shocking to be found out, it', 'Oh! But with a gentleman it  cried Flora with a little scream, ', 'But if we talk of not having changed, look at Papa, is not Papa precisely what he was when you went away, isn t know us will begin to suppose that I am Papa', 'Oh Mr Clennam you insincerest of creatures, I perceive already you have not lost your old way of paying compliments, your old way when you used to pretend to be so sentimentally struck you know--at least I don t know what I mean!', 'You mustn  said Flora--Arthur had looked at his hat, being in a ludicrous dismay, and not knowing what to do:  t know what I am saying--without a word about the dear old days gone for ever, when I come to think of it I dare say it would be much better not to speak of them and it', 'Indeed I have little doubt, that you are married to some Chinese lady, being in China so long and being in business and naturally desirous to settle and extend your connection nothing was more likely than that you should propose to a Chinese lady and nothing was more natural I am sure than that the Chinese lady should accept you and think herself very well off too, I only hope she', 'I am not, married to any lady, Flora.', 'Oh good gracious me I hope you never kept yourself a bachelor so long on my account! but of course you never did why should you, pray don t know where I t they hurt themselves, and why do they stick little bells all over their bridges and temples and hats and things or don', 'Then it', 'Dear dear, only to think of the changes at home Arthur--cannot overcome it, and seems so natural, Mr Clennam far more proper--since you became familiar with the Chinese customs and language which I am persuaded you speak like a Native if not better for you were always quick and clever though immensely difficult no doubt, I am sure the tea chests alone would kill me if I tried, such changes Arthur--I am doing it again, seems so natural, most improper--as no one could have believed, who could have ever imagined Mrs Finching when I can', 'Is that your married name? Finching?', 'Finching oh yes isn t answerable for it and couldn', 'No one could dispute, Arthur--Mr Clennam--that it t be anything else, at least I suppose not you ought to know, but I can', 'My dear Mrs Finching,', 'Oh not that nasty ugly name, say Flora!', 'Flora. I assure you, Flora, I am happy in seeing you once more, and in finding that, like me, you have not forgotten the old foolish dreams, when we saw all before us in the light of our youth and hope.', 'You don  pouted Flora,  s just as likely.', 'No, no, don', 'Oh I must you know, what nonsense not to, I know I am not what you expected, I know that very well.', 'One remark, I wish to make, one explanation I wish to offer, when your Mama came and made a scene of it with my Papa and when I was called down into the little breakfast-room where they were looking at one another with your Mama', 'My dear Mrs Finching, all so long ago and so long concluded, is it worth while seriously to--', 'I can  returned Flora,  s the third place, barefoot.', 'My dear Mrs Finching, you were not to blame, and I never blamed you. We were both too young, too dependent and helpless, to do anything but accept our separation.--Pray think how long ago,', 'One more remark, I wish to make, one more explanation I wish to offer, for five days I had a cold in the head from crying which I passed entirely in the back drawing-room--there is the back drawing-room still on the first floor and still at the back of the house to confirm my words--when that dreary period had passed a lull succeeded years rolled on and Mr F. became acquainted with us at a mutual friend s part it was adoration, Mr F. proposed with the full approval of Papa and what could I do?', 'Nothing whatever, but what you did. Let an old friend assure you of his full conviction that you did quite right.', 'One last remark, I wish to make, one last explanation I wish to offer, there _was_ a time ere Mr F. first paid attentions incapable of being mistaken, but that is past and was not to be, dear Mr Clennam you no longer wear a golden chain you are free I trust you may be happy, here is Papa who is always tiresome and putting in his nose everywhere where he is not wanted.', 'Yes!', 'Bleeding Heart Yard? It t pay you badly, but rents are very hard to get there. You have more trouble with that one place than with all the places belonging to you.', 'Indeed? The people are so poor there?', '_You_ can  snorted Pancks, taking one of his dirty hands out of his rusty iron-grey pockets to bite his nails, if he could find any, and turning his beads of eyes upon his employer,  re poor or not. They say they are, but they all say that. When a man says he re generally sure he isn t help it. You t get your rents.', 'True enough,', 'You  pursued Pancks.  re not going to lodge  re not going to open your gates wide and let  t.', 'If a man takes a room of you at half-a-crown a week, and when the week comes round hasn t got the one thing, why have you got the other? What have you been and done with your money? What do you mean by it? What are you up to? That t say it, more shame for you!', 'You have some extent of such property about the east and north-east here, I believe?', 'Oh, pretty well, You t nice as to situation--not you.', 'When we lived at Henley, Barnes', 'The Monument near London Bridge, was put up arter the Great Fire of London; and the Great Fire of London was not the fire in which your uncle George', 'I hate a fool!', 'Citywards, sir,', 'Shall we walk together?', 'Quite agreeable,', 'A fresh night!', 'Yes, it  assented Pancks.  t got time to feel it.', 'You lead such a busy life?', 'Yes, I have always some of   said Pancks, getting on a little faster.  s a man made for?', 'For nothing else?', 'That  said Pancks.  em will pull long faces to me, and say, Poor as you see us, master, we re awake. I say to them, What else are you made for? It shuts them up. They haven', 'Ah dear, dear, dear!', 'Here am I, What else do you suppose I think I am made for? Nothing. Rattle me out of bed early, set me going, give me as short a time as you like to bolt my meals in, and keep me at it. Keep me always at it, and I', 'What else do you suppose I think I am made for? Nothing. Rattle me out of bed early, set me going, give me as short a time as you like to bolt my meals in, and keep me at it. Keep me always at it, and I', 'What', 'Let us say inclination.', 'I have an inclination to get money, sir, if you will show me how.', 'You are no great reader, I suppose?', 'Never read anything but letters and accounts. Never collect anything but advertisements relative to next of kin. If _that re not of the Clennams of Cornwall, Mr Clennam?', 'Not that I ever heard of.', 'I know you', 'Supposing I had been of the Clennams of Cornwall?', 'You', 'Indeed! I have heard of little enough to my advantage for some time.', 'There  said Pancks, taking his note-book from his breast pocket and putting it in again. ', 'Good night!', 'An accident going to the Hospital?', 'Yes, along of them Mails. They ought to be prosecuted and fined, them Mails. They come a racing out of Lad Lane and Wood Street at twelve or fourteen mile a hour, them Mails do. The only wonder is, that people ain', 'This person is not killed, I hope?', 'I don  said the man,  t for the want of a will in them Mails, if he an  The speaker having folded his arms, and set in comfortably to address his depreciation of them Mails to any of the bystanders who would listen, several voices, out of pure sympathy with the sufferer, confirmed him; one voice saying to Clennam,  re a public nuisance, them Mails, sir; _I_ see one on   another,  em go over a cat, sir--and it might have been your own mother;', 'Why, a native Englishman is put to it every night of his life, to save his life from them Mails, and _he_ knows when they t know nothing about ', 'Is this a foreigner?', 'Dutchman, sir, Prooshan, sir, Ah, poor fellow, he says he', 'First, he wants some water, Are you badly hurt, my friend?', 'Yes, sir; yes, yes, yes. It s my leg. But it pleases me to hear the old music, though I am very bad.', 'You are a traveller! Stay! See, the water! Let me give you some.', 'That', 'Surely, sir.', 'A stranger in this city?', 'Surely, surely, altogether. I am arrived this unhappy evening.', 'From what country?', 'Marseilles.', 'Why, see there! I also! Almost as much a stranger here as you, though born here, I came from Marseilles a little while ago. Don  The face looked up at him imploringly, as he rose from wiping it, and gently replaced the coat that covered the writhing figure.  t leave you till you shall be well taken care of. Courage! You will be very much better half an hour hence.', 'Ah! Altro, Altro!', 'Let us know all about it first, before we pronounce.', 'It', 'Ye-es, Yes, it s a compound fracture above the knee, and a dislocation below. They are both of a beautiful kind.', 'He speaks French?', 'Oh yes, he speaks French.', 'He  he added, in that tongue,  ll walk again to a marvel. Now, let us see whether there', 'From the unhappy suppression of my youngest days, through the rigid and unloving home that followed them, through my departure, my long exile, my return, my mother  said Arthur Clennam, ', 'Little Dorrit.', 'My poor child! Here at midnight?', 'I said Little Dorrit, sir, on purpose to prepare you. I knew you must be very much surprised.', 'Are you alone?', 'No sir, I have got Maggy with me.', 'And I have no fire, And you are-- And it is so cold.', 'Your foot is like marble, my child; put it nearer the warmth.', 'Before I say anything else, may I tell you something, sir?', 'Yes, my child.', 'I wanted a tender word, and could think of no other. As you just now gave yourself the name they give you at my mother', 'Thank you, sir, I should like it better than any name.', 'Little Dorrit.', 'Little mother,', 'It  returned Little Dorrit, ', 'Is it all the same, mother?', 'Just the same.', 'What I was going to tell you, sir, is, that my brother is at large.', 'And what I was going to tell you, sir, is, that I am not to know whose generosity released him--am never to ask, and am never to be told, and am never to thank that gentleman with all my grateful heart!', 'And what I was going to say, sir, is, that if I knew him, and I might, I would tell him that he can never, never know how I feel his goodness, and how my good father would feel it. And what I was going to say, sir, is, that if I knew him, and I might--but I don', 'Maggy and I have been to-night, to the theatre where my sister is engaged.', 'And oh ain nly place, Almost as good as a hospital. Only there ain', 'Almost as good as a hospital. Only there ain', 'We went there, because I like sometimes to know, of my own knowledge, that my sister is doing well; and like to see her there, with my own eyes, when neither she nor Uncle is aware. It is very seldom indeed that I can do that, because when I am not out at work, I am with my father, and even when I am out at work, I hurry home to him. But I pretend to-night that I am at a party.', 'Oh no, certainly! I never was at a party in my life.', 'It is the first night, that I have ever been away from home. And London looks so large, so barren, and so wild.', 'But this is not, what I have come to trouble you with, sir. My sister', 'There were three things, that I thought I would like to say, if you were alone and I might come up-stairs. First, what I have tried to say, but never can--never shall--', 'Hush, hush! That is done with, and disposed of. Let us pass to the second,', 'I think, this is the second thing, sir--I think Mrs Clennam must have found out my secret, and must know where I come from and where I go to. Where I live, I mean.', 'Indeed!', 'I think, that Mr Flintwinch must have watched me.', 'I have met him twice. Both times near home. Both times at night, when I was going back. Both times I thought (though that may easily be my mistake), that he hardly looked as if he had met me by accident.', 'Did he say anything?', 'No; he only nodded and put his head on one side.', 'The devil take his head! it', 'it', 'Is my mother at all changed to you?', 'Oh, not at all. She is just the same. I wondered whether I had better tell her my history. I wondered whether I might--I mean, whether you would like me to tell her. I wondered, whether you would advise me what I ought to do.', 'Little Dorrit, do nothing. I will have some talk with my old friend, Mrs Affery. Do nothing, Little Dorrit--except refresh yourself with such means as there are here. I entreat you to do that.', 'Thank you, I am not hungry. Nor, nor thirsty.--I think Maggy might like something, perhaps.', 'We will make her find pockets presently for all there is here, but before we awake her, there was a third thing to say.', 'Yes. You will not be offended, sir?', 'I promise that, unreservedly.', 'It will sound strange. I hardly know how to say it. Don', 'No, no, no. I am sure it will be natural and right. I am not afraid that I shall put a wrong construction on it, whatever it is.', 'Thank you. You are coming back to see my father again?', 'Yes.', 'You have been so good and thoughtful as to write him a note, saying that you are coming to-morrow?', 'Oh, that was nothing! Yes.', 'Can you guess, what I am going to ask you not to do?', 'I think I can. But I may be wrong.', 'No, you are not wrong, If we should want it so very, very badly that we cannot do without it, let me ask you for it.', 'I Will,--I Will.', 'Don t understand him if he does ask. Don', 'You don  she said;  t know what he really is. How can you, seeing him there all at once, dear love, and not gradually, as I have done! You have been so good to us, so delicately and truly good, that I want him to be better in your eyes than in anybody  cried Little Dorrit, covering her tears with her hands, ', 'Pray, do not be so distressed. Pray, pray, Little Dorrit! This is quite understood now.', 'Thank you, sir. Thank you! I have tried very much to keep myself from saying this; I have thought about it, days and nights; but when I knew for certain you were coming again, I made up my mind to speak to you. Not because I am ashamed of him, but because I know him better than any one does, and love him, and am proud of him.', 'But the gates will have been locked long ago, Where are you going?', 'I am going to Maggy  answered Little Dorrit. ', 'I must accompany you there, I cannot let you go alone.', 'Yes, pray leave us to go there by ourselves. Pray do!', 'Yes, yes, little mother; we know the way, God bless you!', 'If it really was a party! If it was light and warm and beautiful, and it was our house, and my poor dear was its master, and had never been inside these walls. And if Mr Clennam was one of our visitors, and we were dancing to delightful music, and were all as gay and light-hearted as ever we could be! I wonder--', 'What are you doing with the child?', 'What are you doing with yourself?', 'Can', 'I don', 'Killing myself! Now I have answered you, answer me. What are you doing with the child?', 'Poor thing! Have you no feeling, that you keep her out in the cruel streets at such a time as this? Have you no eyes, that you don t look as if you had much) that you don', 'Why, my God! you', 'Don  said Little Dorrit, clasping one of her hands that had suddenly released hers. ', 'Then you had better be, Have you no mother?', 'No.', 'No father?', 'Yes, a very dear one.', 'Go home to him, and be afraid of me. Let me go. Good night!', 'I must thank you first; let me speak to you as if I really were a child.', 'You can  said the woman.  t look at me out of a child', 'Who', 'It', 'Stop! Let', 'I thought so! I know _you_.', 'We have often seen each other, when I have been at church here.', 'More than that, we re one of our curiosities.', 'Indeed!', 'To be sure. As the child of the--by-the-bye, how did you get out so early?', 'We were shut out last night, and are waiting to get in.', 'You don s another hour good yet! Come into the vestry. You m waiting for the painters, or I shouldn t be cold when we have it in our power to warm her up comfortable. Come along.', 'Quite true, till last night.', 'Lord! I am sorry to see, though, that you are faint and tired. Stay a bit. I t be afraid of not going in to join your father when the gate opens. _I', 'There you are, you see. Again as large as life. Oh, never mind thanking. I t born in the Marshalsea Prison, they might have been, if I had been, in my ways of carrying on, of your father s a burial volume, just the thing! We have got Mrs Bangham in this book. But what makes these books interesting to most people is--not who em, but who isn s coming, you know, and when. That', 'None of your nonsense with me, I won', 'Flintwinch, there is a demon of anger in you. Guard against it.', 'there is a demon of anger in you. Guard against it.', 'I don s one or a dozen, If there was fifty, they should all say, None of your nonsense with me, I won d make ', 'What have I done, you wrathful man?', 'Done? Dropped down upon me.', 'If you mean, remonstrated with you--', 'Don t mean, I mean dropped down upon me.', 'I remonstrated with you, because--', 'I won  cried Jeremiah. ', 'I dropped down upon you, then, you ill-conditioned man, for having been needlessly significant to Arthur that morning. I have a right to complain of it as almost a breach of confidence. You did not mean it--', 'I won  interposed the contradictory Jeremiah, flinging back the concession. ', 'I suppose I must leave you to speak in soliloquy if you choose, It is useless my addressing myself to a rash and headstrong old man who has a set purpose not to hear me.', 'Now, I won  said Jeremiah. ', 'After all, you only restore me my own words, Yes.', 'This is why, then. Because you hadn', 'Hold there, Flintwinch! you may go a word too far.', 'I was going to tell you why it was. Because, before you took your own part, I thought you ought to have taken the part of Arthur s father! I had no particular love for Arthur s father s father was not much above me--was poorer as far as his pocket went--and when his uncle might as soon have left me his heir as have left him. He starved in the parlour, and I starved in the kitchen; that was the principal difference in our positions; there was not much more than a flight of breakneck stairs between us. I never took to him in those times; I don t need to look at you twice (you were a good-looking woman at that time) to know who t lean against the dead.', 'I do _not_--as you call it--lean against the dead.', 'But you had a mind to do it, if I had submitted, and that t forget that I didn s father? Hey? It doesn ll tell you how it is. I may be a bit of an oddity in point of temper, but this is my temper--I can', 'and that t forget that I didn s father? Hey? It doesn ll tell you how it is. I may be a bit of an oddity in point of temper, but this is my temper--I can', 'Nothing will turn me from it, Flintwinch, when I have justified it to myself. Add that.', 'Justified it to yourself? I said you were the most determined woman on the face of the earth (or I meant to say so), and if you are determined to justify any object you entertain, of course you', 'Man! I justify myself by the authority of these Books,', 'Never mind that, we won t go down before them. I have been faithful to you, and useful to you, and I am attached to you. But I can t consent, and I never did consent, and I never will consent to be lost in you. Swallow up everybody else, and welcome. The peculiarity of my temper is, ma t be swallowed up alive.', 'Enough and more than enough of the subject,', 'Unless you drop down upon me again, and then you must expect to hear of it again.', 'Please to light the candle, Flintwinch, It is nearly time for tea. Little Dorrit is coming, and will find me in the dark.', 'What are you going to do with Little Dorrit? Is she to come to work here for ever? To come to tea here for ever? To come backwards and forwards here, in the same way, for ever?', 'How can you talk about "for ever" to a maimed creature like me? Are we not all cut down like the grass of the field, and was not I shorn by the scythe many years ago: since when I have been lying here, waiting to be gathered into the barn?', 'Ay, ay! But since you have been lying here--not near dead--nothing like it--numbers of children and young people, blooming women, strong men, and what not, have been cut down and carried; and still here are you, you see, not much changed after all. Your time and mine may be a long one yet. When I say for ever, I mean (though I am not poetical) through all our time.', 'So long as Little Dorrit is quiet and industrious, and stands in need of the slight help I can give her, and deserves it; so long, I suppose, unless she withdraws of her own act, she will continue to come here, I being spared.', 'Nothing more than that?', 'What should there be more than that! What could there be more than that!', 'Do you happen to know, Mrs Clennam, s liege lord then demanded in a much lower voice, and with an amount of expression that seemed quite out of proportion to the simple purpose of his words, ', 'No.', 'Would you--now, would you like to know?', 'If I cared to know, I should know already. Could I not have asked her any day?', 'Then you don', 'I do not.', 'Wherever she lives, she has made a secret of it, and she shall always keep her secret from me.', 'After all, perhaps you would rather not have known the fact, any how?', 'Flintwinch, why do you goad me? Look round this room. If it is any compensation for my long confinement within these narrow limits--not that I complain of being afflicted; you know I never complain of that--if it is any compensation to me for long confinement to this room, that while I am shut up from all pleasant change I am also shut up from the knowledge of some things that I may prefer to avoid knowing, why should you, of all men, grudge me that belief?', 'I don', 'Then say no more. Say no more. Let Little Dorrit keep her secret from me, and do you keep it from me also. Let her come and go, unobserved and unquestioned. Let me suffer, and let me have what alleviation belongs to my condition. Is it so much, that you torment me like an evil spirit?', 'I asked you a question. That', 'I have answered it. So, say no more. Say no more.', 'Oh Jeremiah! What a start you gave me!', 'What have you been doing, woman? You', 'Oh Jeremiah, I have been a-dreaming!', 'Don s her tea-time?', 'Jeremiah? Tea-time? I don s come to me. But I got such a dreadful turn, Jeremiah, before I went--off a-dreaming, that I think it must be that.', 'Yoogh! Sleepy-Head! what are you talking about?', 'Such a strange noise, Jeremiah, and such a curious movement. In the kitchen here--just here.', 'Rats, cats, water, drains,', 'Affery, my woman, s lips as a test for the detection of spirituous liquors,  t get tea pretty quick, old woman, you ll send you flying to the other end of the kitchen.', 'if you don ll become sensible of a rustle and a touch that', 'Affery, I am glad it  Affery immediately replied,  t ask me nothing, Arthur! I am frightened out of one half of my life, and dreamed out of the other. Don t know which is which, or what is what!', 'There, Jeremiah! Now! What', 'How do you do, Mr Doyce? I am glad to see you again, and in a healthier place than the Circumlocution Office.', 'Ha! Mr Meagles  exclaimed that public criminal, coming out of some mental combinations he had been making, and offering his hand. ', 'Readily. It s not Barnacle.', 'No, no, And now I know what it is. It', 'I have some hope, that we may be going to the same place, Mr Doyce.', 'Meaning Twickenham? I am glad to hear it.', 'It is much to be regretted, that you ever turned your thoughts that way, Mr Doyce.', 'True, sir, true to a certain extent. But what is a man to do? if he has the misfortune to strike out something serviceable to the nation, he must follow where it leads him.', 'Hadn', 'He can  said Doyce, shaking his head with a thoughtful smile.  s not put into his head to be buried. It', 'It s put into his head to be made useful. You hold your life on the condition that to the last you shall struggle hard for it. Every man holds a discovery on the same terms.', 'That is to say, you are not finally discouraged even now?', 'I have no right to be, if I am, The thing is as true as it ever was.', 'No, not at present. I had when I first entered on it, and a good man he was. But he has been dead some years; and as I could not easily take to the notion of another when I lost him, I bought his share for myself and have gone on by myself ever since. And here  he said, stopping for a moment with a good-humoured laugh in his eyes, and laying his closed right hand, with its peculiar suppleness of thumb, on Clennam no inventor can be a man of business, you know.', 'No?', 'Why, so the men of business say, I don  said Doyce, nodding towards Twickenham,  t you know, as a man not quite able to take care of himself?', 'So I find that I must have a partner who is a man of business and not guilty of any inventions, if it t think he s for him to say--whoever he is--not for me.', 'You have not chosen him yet, then?', 'No, sir, no. I have only just come to a decision to take one. The fact is, there t do all. I am going to talk over the best way of negotiating the matter, if I find a spare half-hour between this and Monday morning, with my--my Nurse and protector, He is a sagacious man in business, and has had a good apprenticeship to it.', 'Here we are, you see, boxed up, Mr Clennam, within our own home-limits, as if we were never going to expand--that is, travel--again. Not like Marseilles, eh? No allonging and marshonging here!', 'A different kind of beauty, indeed!', 'But, Lord bless me! it was an uncommonly pleasant thing being in quarantine, wasn', 'it was an uncommonly pleasant thing being in quarantine, wasn', 'If it was summer-time, which I wish it was on your account, and in order that you might see the place at its best, you would hardly be able to hear yourself speak for birds. Being practical people, we never allow anybody to scare the birds; and the birds, being practical people too, come about us in myriads. We are delighted to see you, Clennam (if you', 'I have not had so pleasant a greeting, except once--since we last walked to and fro, looking down at the Mediterranean.', 'Ah! Something like a look out, _that_ was, wasn t want a military government, but I shouldn s Devilish still.', 'Here they are, you see, I stood behind these two articles five-and-thirty years running, when I no more thought of gadding about than I now think of--staying at home. When I left the Bank for good, I asked for them, and brought them away with me. I mention it at once, or you might suppose that I sit in my counting-house (as Pet says I do), like the king in the poem of the four-and-twenty blackbirds, counting out my money.', 'Their names?', 'Ah, to be sure! You have never heard any name but Pet. Pet s Lillie.', 'Should you have known, Mr Clennam, that one of them was meant for me?', 'I might have thought that both of them were meant for you, both are still so like you. Indeed, I cannot even now say which is not your portrait.', 'D  cried Mr Meagles to his wife, who had followed her daughter.  s always the same, Clennam; nobody can decide. The child to your left is Pet.', 'But come! You have had a long walk, and will be glad to get your boots off. As to Daniel here, I suppose he', 'Why not?', 'Oh! You have so many things to think about, Figures, and wheels, and cogs, and levers, and screws, and cylinders, and a thousand things.', 'In my calling, the greater usually includes the less. But never mind, never mind! Whatever pleases you, pleases me.', 'And Miss Wade, Has anybody seen Miss Wade?', 'I have,', 'Tatty! You seen Miss Wade?--where?', 'Here, miss,', 'How?', 'With my eyes! I met her near the church.', 'What was she doing there I wonder! Not going to it, I should think.', 'She had written to me first,', 'Oh, Tatty! take your hands away. I feel as if some one else was touching me!', 'Did you wish to know, sir, what Miss Wade wrote to me about?', 'Well, Tattycoram, since you ask the question, and we are all friends here, perhaps you may as well mention it, if you are so inclined.', 'She knew, when we were travelling, where you lived, and she had seen me not quite--not quite--', 'and she had seen me not quite--not quite--', 'Not quite in a good temper, Tattycoram? Take a little time--count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'So she wrote to me to say that if I ever felt myself hurt, or found myself worried, I might go to her, and be considerately treated. I was to think of it, and could speak to her by the church. So I went there to thank her.', 'Tatty, Miss Wade almost frightened me when we parted, and I scarcely like to think of her just now as having been so near me without my knowing it. Tatty dear!', 'Hey? Count another five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'Now there, There t among practical people. Mother and I know, solely from being practical, that there are times when that girl t like to think of the way in which that unfortunate child, with all that passion and protest in her, feels when she hears the Fifth Commandment on a Sunday. I am always inclined to call out, Church, Count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'There t among practical people. Mother and I know, solely from being practical, that there are times when that girl t like to think of the way in which that unfortunate child, with all that passion and protest in her, feels when she hears the Fifth Commandment on a Sunday. I am always inclined to call out, Church, Count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'Why, indeed!', 'Mr Meagles, do you remember when you advised me to go straight to London?', 'Perfectly well.', 'And when you gave me some other good advice which I needed at that time?', 'I won  answered Mr Meagles: ', 'I have acted on your advice; and having disembarrassed myself of an occupation that was painful to me for many reasons, wish to devote myself and what means I have, to another pursuit.', 'Right! You can', 'Now, as I came down to-day, I found that your friend, Mr Doyce, is looking for a partner in his business--not a partner in his mechanical knowledge, but in the ways and means of turning the business arising from it to the best account.', 'Just so,', 'Mr Doyce mentioned incidentally, in the course of our conversation, that he was going to take your valuable advice on the subject of finding such a partner. If you should think our views and opportunities at all likely to coincide, perhaps you will let him know my available position. I speak, of course, in ignorance of the details, and they may be unsuitable on both sides.', 'No doubt, no doubt,', 'But they will be a question of figures and accounts--', 'Just so, just so,', '--And I shall be glad to enter into the subject, provided Mr Doyce responds, and you think well of it. If you will at present, therefore, allow me to place it in your hands, you will much oblige me.', 'Clennam, I accept the trust with readiness, And without anticipating any of the points which you, as a man of business, have of course reserved, I am free to say to you that I think something may come of this. Of one thing you may be perfectly certain. Daniel is an honest man.', 'I am so sure of it that I have promptly made up my mind to speak to you.', 'You must guide him, you know; you must steer him; you must direct him; he is one of a crotchety sort, but he is as honest as the sun, and so good night!', 'Suppose that a man, who had been of age some twenty years or so; who was a diffident man, from the circumstances of his youth; who was rather a grave man, from the tenor of his life; who knew himself to be deficient in many little engaging qualities which he admired in others, from having been long in a distant region, with nothing softening near him; who had no kind sisters to present to her; who had no congenial home to make her known in; who was a stranger in the land; who had not a fortune to compensate, in any measure, for these defects; who had nothing in his favour but his honest love and his general wish to do right--suppose such a man were to come to this house, and were to yield to the captivation of this charming girl, and were to persuade himself that he could hope to win her; what a weakness it would be!', 'Not this morning, You won  company, dripping wet. Lie down.', 'I heard no dog last night,', 'Miss Minnie is not down yet, gentlemen, Mr Clennam, sir,', 'Odd enough, Mr Clennam, that we should have met just now, Allow me to introduce myself--Henry Gowan. A pretty place this, and looks wonderfully well this morning!', 'It', 'Quite new. I made acquaintance with it only yesterday afternoon.', 'Ah! Of course this is not its best aspect. It used to look charming in the spring, before they went away last time. I should like you to have seen it then.', 'I have had the pleasure of seeing it under many circumstances during the last three years, and it', 'Well, Gowan, how goes the world with you this morning?', 'Much as usual, sir. Lion and I being determined not to waste anything of our weekly visit, turned out early, and came over from Kingston, my present headquarters, where I am making a sketch or two.', 'Mrs Gowan is well, Henry?', 'My mother is quite well, thank you. I have taken the liberty of making an addition to your family dinner-party to-day, which I hope will not be inconvenient to you or to Mr Meagles. I couldn  he explained, turning to the latter. ', 'The young fellow wrote to propose himself to me; and as he is well connected, I thought you would not object to my transferring him here.', 'Who _is_ the young fellow?', 'He is one of the Barnacles. Tite Barnacle s Department. I can at least guarantee that the river shall not suffer from his visit. He won', 'Aye, aye? A Barnacle is he? _We_ know something of that family, eh, Dan? By George, they are at the top of the tree, though! Let me see. What relation will this young fellow be to Lord Decimus now? His Lordship married, in seventeen ninety-seven, Lady Jemima Bilberry, who was the second daughter by the third marriage--no! There I am wrong! That was Lady Seraphina--Lady Jemima was the first daughter by the second marriage of the fifteenth Earl of Stiltstalking with the Honourable Clementina Toozellem. Very well. Now this young fellow', 'That', 'Nephew--to--Lord--Decimus, By George, you are right, Gowan. So he is.', 'Consequently, Lord Decimus is his great uncle.', 'But stop a bit! Then on the mother', 'Of course she is.', 'Aye, aye, aye? Indeed, indeed? We shall be glad to see him. We', 'I am much obliged to you, Clarence is a great ass, but he is one of the dearest and best fellows that ever lived!', 'Clarence is a great ass, but he is one of the dearest and best fellows that ever lived!', 'You know Mr Gowan?', 'I have seen him here. Comes here every Sunday when they are at home.', 'An artist, I infer from what he says?', 'A sort of a one,', 'What sort of a one?', 'Why, he has sauntered into the Arts at a leisurely Pall-Mall pace, and I doubt if they care to be taken quite so coolly.', 'I want to speak to you, Gowan. I say. Look here. Who is that fellow?', 'A friend of our host', 'He', 'Is he? How do you know?', 'Ecod, sir, he was Pitching into our people the other day in the most tremendous manner. Went up to our place and Pitched into my father to that extent that it was necessary to order him out. Came back to our Department, and Pitched into me. Look here. You never saw such a fellow.', 'What did he want?', 'Ecod, sir, he said he wanted to know, you know! Pervaded our Department--without an appointment--and said he wanted to know!', 'Those are not good prospects for a painter,', 'No,', 'I thought our good friend a little changed, and out of spirits, after he came this morning?', 'Yes,', 'But not his daughter?', 'No,', 'The truth is, he has twice taken his daughter abroad in the hope of separating her from Mr Gowan. He rather thinks she is disposed to like him, and he has painful doubts (I quite agree with him, as I dare say you do) of the hopefulness of such a marriage.', 'There--', 'Yes, you have taken cold,', '--There is an engagement between them, of course?', 'No. As I am told, certainly not. It has been solicited on the gentleman', 'Ah! We see enough!', 'Come in, come in! s voice, her father s father', 'Ah, Young John! How do you do, how do you do!', 'Pretty well, I thank you, sir. I hope you are the same.', 'Yes, John Chivery; yes. Nothing to complain of.', 'I have taken the liberty, sir, of--', 'Eh?', '--A few cigars, sir.', 'Oh! Thank you, Young John, thank you. But really, I am afraid I am too--No? Well then, I will say no more about it. Put them on the mantelshelf, if you please, Young John. And sit down, sit down. You are not a stranger, John.', 'Thank you, sir, I am sure--Miss; Miss Amy quite well, sir?', 'Miss Amy quite well, sir?', 'Yes, John, yes; very well. She is out.', 'Indeed, sir?', 'Yes, John. Miss Amy is gone for an airing. My young people all go out a good deal. But at their time of life, it', 'Very much so, I am sure, sir.', 'An airing. An airing. Yes. Amy has gone for an airing on the Iron Bridge. She has become quite partial to the Iron Bridge of late, and seems to like to walk there better than anywhere. Your father is not on duty at present, I think, John?', 'No, sir, he comes on later in the afternoon. I am afraid I must wish you good day, sir.', 'So soon? Good day, Young John. Nay, nay, never mind your glove, John. Shake hands with it on. You are no stranger here, you know.', 'Miss Amy, I am afraid I disturbed you by speaking to you.', 'Yes, rather. I--I came here to be alone, and I thought I was.', 'Miss Amy, I took the liberty of walking this way, because Mr Dorrit chanced to mention, when I called upon him just now, that you--', 'Miss Amy, I hope I don', 'Miss Amy, pray! Will you have the goodness to stop a moment? Miss Amy, if it comes to that, let _me_ go. I shall go out of my senses, if I have to think that I have driven you away like this.', 'Miss Amy, I know very well that your family is far above mine. It were vain to conceal it. There never was a Chivery a gentleman that ever I heard of, and I will not commit the meanness of making a false representation on a subject so momentous. Miss Amy, I know very well that your high-souled brother, and likewise your spirited sister, spurn me from a height. What I have to do is to respect them, to wish to be admitted to their friendship, to look up at the eminence on which they are placed from my lowlier station--for, whether viewed as tobacco or viewed as the lock, I well know it is lowly--and ever wish them well and happy.', 'Miss Amy, I have had for a long time--ages they seem to me--Revolving ages--a heart-cherished wish to say something to you. May I say it?', 'May I--Miss Amy, I but ask the question humbly--may I say it? I have been so unlucky already in giving you pain without having any such intentions, before the holy Heavens! that there is no fear of my saying it unless I have your leave. I can be miserable alone, I can be cut up by myself, why should I also make miserable and cut up one that I would fling myself off that parapet to give half a moment s much to do, for I', 'If you please, John Chivery, since you are so considerate as to ask me whether you shall say any more--if you please, no.', 'Never, Miss Amy?', 'No, if you please. Never.', 'O Lord!', 'But perhaps you will let me, instead, say something to you. I want to say it earnestly, and with as plain a meaning as it is possible to express. When you think of us, John--I mean my brother, and sister, and me--don', 'As to me, think as little of me as you can; the less, the better. When you think of me at all, John, let it only be as the child you have seen grow up in the prison with one set of duties always occupying her; as a weak, retired, contented, unprotected girl. I particularly want you to remember, that when I come outside the gate, I am unprotected and solitary.', 'Because, I know I can then quite trust you not to forget to-day, and not to say any more to me. You are so generous that I know I can trust to you for that; and I do and I always will. I am going to show you, at once, that I fully trust you. I like this place where we are speaking better than any place I know; and I may be often here. I know it is only necessary for me to tell you so, to be quite sure that you will never come here again in search of me. And I am--quite sure!', 'And good-bye, John, And I hope you will have a good wife one day, and be a happy man. I am sure you will deserve to be happy, and you will be, John.', 'Oh, don  said Little Dorrit piteously.  t, don', 'Good-bye, Miss Amy. Good-bye!', 'Here lie the mortal remains Of JOHN CHIVERY, Never anything worth mentioning, Who died about the end of the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty-six, Of a broken heart, Requesting with his last breath that the word AMY might be inscribed over his ashes, which was accordingly directed to be done, By his afflicted Parents.', 'You are a little low this evening, Frederick, Anything the matter?', 'The matter? No, William, no. Nothing is the matter.', 'If you could be persuaded to smarten yourself up a little, Frederick--', 'Aye, aye! But I can t be. Don s all over.', 'I think, William, that I am tired, and will go home to bed.', 'that I am tired, and will go home to bed.', 'My dear Frederick, don t sacrifice your inclination to me.', 'Late hours, and a heated atmosphere, and years, I suppose, weaken me.', 'My dear Frederick, do you think you are sufficiently careful of yourself? Do you think your habits are as precise and methodical as--shall I say as mine are? Not to revert again to that little eccentricity which I mentioned just now, I doubt if you take air and exercise enough, Frederick. Here is the parade, always at your service. Why not use it more regularly than you do?', 'Hah! Yes, yes, yes, yes.', 'But it is of no use saying yes, yes, my dear Frederick, unless you act on that assent. Consider my case, Frederick. I am a kind of example. Necessity and time have taught me what to do. At certain stated hours of the day, you will find me on the parade, in my room, in the Lodge, reading the paper, receiving company, eating and drinking. I have impressed upon Amy during many years, that I must have my meals (for instance) punctually. Amy has grown up in a sense of the importance of these arrangements, and you know what a good girl she is.', 'My dear fellow, you said that before, and it does not express much, Frederick, even if it means much. I wish I could rouse you, my good Frederick; you want to be roused.', 'Yes, William, yes. No doubt, But I am not like you.', 'Thank you, Chivery, quite well. And you?', 'I had a visit from Young John to-day, Chivery. And very smart he looked, I assure you.', 'How vexation, Chivery?', 'No odds, Never mind. Mr Frederick going out?', 'Yes, Chivery, my brother is going home to bed. He is tired, and not quite well. Take care, Frederick, take care. Good night, my dear Frederick!', 'Be so kind as to keep the door open a moment, Chivery, that I may see him go along the passage and down the steps. Take care, Frederick! (He is very infirm.) Mind the steps! (He is so very absent.) Be careful how you cross, Frederick. (I really don', 'Something, I--hem!--I don s a little thing, but it puts me out, my love. It  turning his hands over and over and looking closely at them, ', 'I--hem!--I can', 'I--ha!--I can s owing to. I am sure I cannot imagine what the cause of it is. There was a certain Jackson here once, a turnkey of the name of Jackson (I don s exact expression: indeed I think he said tolerate him--on her father s--account. I hardly know how I have strayed into this story. I suppose it has been through being unable to account for Chivery; but as to the connection between the two, I don', 'What does it matter whether I eat or starve? What does it matter whether such a blighted life as mine comes to an end, now, next week, or next year? What am I worth to anyone? A poor prisoner, fed on alms and broken victuals; a squalid, disgraced wretch!', 'Father, father!', 'Amy, I tell you, if you could see me as your mother saw me, you wouldn', 'Dear father!', 'If I had but a picture of myself in those days, though it was ever so ill done, you would be proud of it, you would be proud of it. But I have no such thing. Now, let me be a warning! Let no man, fail to preserve at least that little of the times of his prosperity and respect. Let his children have that clue to what he was. Unless my face, when I am dead, subsides into the long departed look--they say such things happen, I don', 'Father, father!', 'O despise me, despise me! Look away from me, don', 'Dear father, loved father, darling of my heart!', 'Let it lie there, father. Look at me, father, kiss me, father! Only think of me, father, for one little moment!', 'And yet I have some respect here. I have made some stand against it. I am not quite trodden down. Go out and ask who is the chief person in the place. They s your father. Go out and ask who is never trifled with, and who is always treated with some delicacy. They ll say your father', 'Yes, father.', 'Then come back by all means, my love.', 'I shall be very quiet, father.', 'Don  he said, giving her his kind permission fully. ', 'Only Amy, father.', 'Amy, my child, come here. I want to say a word to you.', 'My love, you have had a life of hardship here. No companions, no recreations, many cares I am afraid?', 'Don', 'You know my position, Amy. I have not been able to do much for you; but all I have been able to do, I have done.', 'Yes, my dear father, I know, I know.', 'I am in the twenty-third year of my life here, It is all I could do for my children--I have done it. Amy, my love, you are by far the best loved of the three; I have had you principally in my mind--whatever I have done for your sake, my dear child, I have done freely and without murmuring.', 'Why, good gracious, Amy, what ever brought you here?', 'I wanted to see you, Fanny dear; and as I am going out all day to-morrow, and knew you might be engaged all day to-day, I thought--', 'But the idea, Amy, of _you_ coming behind! I never did!', 'Less noise there, darlings!', 'The notion of you among professionals, Amy, is really the last thing I could have conceived! Why, how did you ever get here?', 'I don', 'Like you quiet little things! You can make your way anywhere, I believe. _I_ couldn', 'Well! And what have you got on your mind, Amy? Of course you have got something on your mind about me?', 'It is not much; but since you told me of the lady who gave you the bracelet, Fanny--', 'Look out there, ladies! Look out there, darlings!', 'Well, Amy? what were you going to say?', 'Since you told me a lady had given you the bracelet you showed me, Fanny, I have not been quite easy on your account, and indeed want to know a little more if you will confide more to me.', 'Now, ladies! Now, darlings!', 'One, two, three, four, five, six--go! One, two, three, four, five, six--go! Steady, darlings! One, two, three, four, five, six--go! Stop a moment, Amy, and let them get away before us, Everybody at eleven to-morrow, ladies! Everybody at eleven to-morrow, darlings!', 'mugged I am coming, I am coming!', 'And so, Amy, s arm as the arm to be relied on: ', 'I am interested, Fanny, and concerned in anything that concerns you.', 'So you are, so you are, and you are the best of Amys. If I am ever a little provoking, I am sure you t care, if the others were not so common. None of them have come down in the world as we have. They are all on their own level. Common.', 'Now, Amy, come with me, if you are not too tired to walk to Harley Street, Cavendish Square.', 'Mrs Merdle, My sister, ma', 'I am glad to see your sister, Miss Dorrit. I did not remember that you had a sister.', 'I did not mention that I had,', 'Ah! I have caught you. I know you didn  All her action was usually with her left hand because her hands were not a pair; and left being much the whiter and plumper of the two. Then she added: ', 'Also professional?', 'My sister, ma  said Fanny, in whom there was a singular mixture of deference and hardihood, ', 'Do you think, at your sister', 'She is much older than she looks, almost as old as I am.', 'Society, is so difficult to explain to young persons (indeed is so difficult to explain to most persons), that I am glad to hear that. I wish Society was not so arbitrary, I wish it was not so exacting--Bird, be quiet!', 'But, we must take it as we find it. We know it is hollow and conventional and worldly and very shocking, but unless we are Savages in the Tropical seas (I should have been charmed to be one myself--most delightful life and perfect climate, I am told), we must consult it. It is the common lot. Mr Merdle is a most extensive merchant, his transactions are on the vastest scale, his wealth and influence are very great, but even he--Bird, be quiet!', 'Since your sister begs that I would terminate our personal acquaintance, by relating the circumstances that are much to her credit, I cannot object to comply with her request, I am sure. I have a son (I was first married extremely young) of two or three-and-twenty.', 'A son of two or three-and-twenty. He is a little gay, a thing Society is accustomed to in young men, and he is very impressible. Perhaps he inherits that misfortune. I am very impressible myself, by nature. The weakest of creatures--my feelings are touched in a moment.', 'So he is very impressible. Not a misfortune in our natural state I dare say, but we are not in a natural state. Much to be lamented, no doubt, particularly by myself, who am a child of nature if I could but show it; but so it is. Society suppresses us and dominates us--Bird, be quiet!', 'It is quite unnecessary to say to a person of your good sense, wide range of experience, and cultivated feeling, that the stage sometimes has a fascination for young men of that class of character. In saying the stage, I mean the people on it of the female sex. Therefore, when I heard that my son was supposed to be fascinated by a dancer, I knew what that usually meant in Society, and confided in her being a dancer at the Opera, where young men moving in Society are usually fascinated.', 'As your sister will tell you, when I found what the theatre was I was much surprised and much distressed. But when I found that your sister, by rejecting my son', 'In a distracted condition, which only a mother--moving in Society--can be susceptible of, I determined to go myself to the theatre, and represent my state of mind to the dancer. I made myself known to your sister. I found her, to my surprise, in many respects different from my expectations; and certainly in none more so, than in meeting me with--what shall I say--a sort of family assertion on her own part?', 'I told you, ma  said Fanny, with a heightening colour,  s; and that I had a brother who, knowing the circumstances, would be of the same opinion, and would not consider such a connection any honour.', 'Miss Dorrit, precisely what I was on the point of telling your sister, in pursuance of your request. Much obliged to you for recalling it so accurately and anticipating me. I immediately, (for I am the creature of impulse), took a bracelet from my arm, and begged your sister to let me clasp it on hers, in token of the delight I had in our being able to approach the subject so far on a common footing.', 'And I told you, Mrs Merdle, that we might be unfortunate, but we are not common.', 'I think, the very words, Miss Dorrit,', 'And I told you, Mrs Merdle, that if you spoke to me of the superiority of your son s standing, even in the Society in which he now moved (what that was, was best known to myself), was eminently superior, and was acknowledged by every one.', 'Quite accurate, A most admirable memory.', 'Thank you, ma', 'There is very little to tell, but it is to your sister', 'Let my sister know, if you please, Mrs Merdle, that I had already had the honour of telling your son that I wished to have nothing whatever to say to him.', 'Well, Miss Dorrit, perhaps I might have mentioned that before. If I did not think of it, perhaps it was because my mind reverted to the apprehensions I had at the time that he might persevere and you might have something to say to him. I also mentioned to your sister--I again address the non-professional Miss Dorrit--that my son would have nothing in the event of such a marriage, and would be an absolute beggar. (I mention that merely as a fact which is part of the narrative, and not as supposing it to have influenced your sister, except in the prudent and legitimate way in which, constituted as our artificial system is, we must all be influenced by such considerations.) Finally, after some high words and high spirit on the part of your sister, we came to the complete understanding that there was no danger; and your sister was so obliging as to allow me to present her with a mark or two of my appreciation at my dressmaker', 'Also, as to promise to give me the present pleasure of a closing interview, and of parting with her on the best of terms. On which occasion, s hand, ', 'Adieu, Miss Dorrit, with best wishes, If we could only come to a Millennium, or something of that sort, I for one might have the pleasure of knowing a number of charming and talented persons from whom I am at present excluded. A more primitive state of society would be delicious to me. There used to be a poem when I learnt lessons, something about Lo the poor Indians whose something mind! If a few thousand persons moving in Society, could only go and be Indians, I would put my name down directly; but as, moving in Society, we can', 'Well? Have you nothing to say, Amy?', 'Have you nothing to say, Amy?', 'Oh, I don  she answered, distressed.  t like this young man, Fanny?', 'Like him? He is almost an idiot.', 'I am so sorry--don', 'You little Fool! Have you no spirit at all? But that  with the scornfullest emphasis, ', 'Don', 'You do what you can for them! Would you let a woman like this, whom you could see, if you had any experience of anything, to be as false and insolent as a woman can be--would you let her put her foot upon your family, and thank her for it?', 'No, Fanny, I am sure.', 'Then make her pay for it, you mean little thing. What else can you make her do? Make her pay for it, you stupid child; and do your family some credit with the money!', 'If you despise me, because I am a dancer, why did you put me in the way of being one? It was your doing. You would have me stoop as low as the ground before this Mrs Merdle, and let her say what she liked and do what she liked, and hold us all in contempt, and tell me so to my face. Because I am a dancer!', 'O Fanny!', 'And Tip, too, poor fellow. She is to disparage him just as much as she likes, without any check--I suppose because he has been in the law, and the docks, and different things. Why, it was your doing, Amy. You might at least approve of his being defended.', 'And your father, your poor father, Amy. Because he is not free to show himself and to speak for himself, you would let such people insult him with impunity. If you don', 'But indeed, indeed, Amy, I hope and I think you would have seen this differently, if you had known a little more of Society.', 'Perhaps I might, Fanny,', 'You see, while you have been domestic and resignedly shut up there, Amy, I have been out, moving more in Society, and may have been getting proud and spirited--more than I ought to be, perhaps?', 'And while you have been thinking of the dinner or the clothes, I may have been thinking, you know, of the family. Now, may it not be so, Amy?', 'Especially as we know, that there certainly is a tone in the place to which you have been so true, which does belong to it, and which does make it different from other aspects of Society. So kiss me once again, Amy dear, and we will agree that we may both be right, and that you are a tranquil, domestic, home-loving, good girl.', 'Why not upon me too! It was not unreasonable in Fanny.', 'I am told, that Mr Merdle has made another enormous hit. They say a hundred thousand pounds.', 'Thank you, my lord, thank you. I accept your congratulations with pride, and I am glad you approve.', 'Why, I don  smiling Treasury turned him by the arm towards the sideboard and spoke banteringly, ', 'No, no, that is not the light in which one so distinguished for practical knowledge and great foresight, can be expected to regard it. If we should ever be happily enabled, by accidentally possessing the control over circumstances, to propose to one so eminent to--to come among us, and give us the weight of his influence, knowledge, and character, we could only propose it to him as a duty. In fact, as a duty that he owed to Society.', 'Any better to-day?', 'No, I am no better.', 'A pity I didn', 'Well! I will come to-morrow as I drive by.', 'Yes, yes, you are both right. But I may as well tell you that I can find nothing the matter with Mr Merdle. He has the constitution of a rhinoceros, the digestion of an ostrich, and the concentration of an oyster. As to nerves, Mr Merdle is of a cool temperament, and not a sensitive man: is about as invulnerable, I should say, as Achilles. How such a man should suppose himself unwell without reason, you may think strange. But I have found nothing the matter with him. He may have some deep-seated recondite complaint. I can', '(Private) I ask your pardon, sir, but which way might you be going?', 'but which way might you be going?', 'I am going over the Bridge.', '(Private) I ask your pardon again, but could you go round by Horsemonger Lane? Could you by any means find time to look in at that address?', '(Private) It an  said Mr Chivery.  s my wife. She  said Mr Chivery, answering Clennam respecting _her_.', 'I will make a point of seeing your wife directly.', 'Thank you, sir. Much obliged. It an', 'You may see him now, if you', 'Our John,', 'It  said Mrs Chivery, shaking her head afresh.  t go out, even in the back-yard, when there s linen to keep the neighbours ll sit there, hours. Hours he will. Says he feels as if it was groves!', 'Please to take a seat, sir, Miss Dorrit is the matter with Our John, sir; he s to be made good to his parents when bust?', 'Sir, you are acquainted with the family, and have interested yourself with the family, and are influential with the family. If you can promote views calculated to make two young people happy, let me, for Our John', 'I have been so habituated, during the short time I have known her, to consider Little--I have been so habituated to consider Miss Dorrit in a light altogether removed from that in which you present her to me, that you quite take me by surprise. Does she know your son?', 'Brought up together, sir, Played together.', 'Does she know your son as her admirer?', 'Oh! bless you, sir, she never could have seen him on a Sunday without knowing he was that. His cane alone would have told it long ago, if nothing else had. Young men like John don', 'Perhaps Miss Dorrit may not be so ready as you, you see.', 'Then she knows it, sir, by word of mouth.', 'Are you sure?', 'Sir, sure and certain as in this house I am. I see my son go out with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I see my son come in with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I know he done it!', 'May I ask you how he came to fall into the desponding state which causes you so much uneasiness?', 'That, took place on that same day when to this house I see that John with these eyes return. Never been himself in this house since. Never was like what he has been since, not from the hour when to this house seven year ago me and his father, as tenants by the quarter, came!', 'May I venture to inquire what is your version of the matter?', 'You may, and I will give it to you in honour and in word as true as in this shop I stand. Our John has every one s good wish. He played with her as a child when in that yard a child she played. He has known her ever since. He went out upon the Sunday afternoon when in this very parlour he had dined, and met her, with appointment or without appointment; which, I do not pretend to say. He made his offer to her. Her brother and sister is high in their views, and against Our John. Her father is all for himself in his views and against sharing her with any one. Under which circumstances she has answered Our John, "No, John, I cannot have you, I cannot have any husband, it is not my intentions ever to become a wife, it is my intentions to be always a sacrifice, farewell, find another worthy of you, and forget me!" This is the way in which she is doomed to be a constant slave to them that are not worthy that a constant slave she unto them should be. This is the way in which Our John has come to find no pleasure but in taking cold among the linen, and in showing in that yard, as in that yard I have myself shown you, a broken-down ruin that goes home to his mother', 'Have I startled you?', 'I thought I knew the step,', 'And did you know it, Little Dorrit? You could hardly have expected mine.', 'I did not expect any. But when I heard a step, I thought it--sounded like yours.', 'Are you going further?', 'No, sir, I am only walking here for a little change.', 'It is so strange. Perhaps you can hardly understand it. I sometimes have a sensation as if it was almost unfeeling to walk here.', 'Unfeeling?', 'To see the river, and so much sky, and so many objects, and such change and motion. Then to go back, you know, and find him in the same cramped place.', 'Ah yes! But going back, you must remember that you take with you the spirit and influence of such things to cheer him.', 'Do I? I hope I may! I am afraid you fancy too much, sir, and make me out too powerful. If you were in prison, could I bring such comfort to you?', 'Yes, Little Dorrit, I am sure of it.', 'Maggy, you promised me to stop near father.', 'So I would, Little Mother, only he wouldn s a good  s a poor thing of ten year old to do? And if Mr Tip--if he happens to be a coming in as I come out, and if he says "Where are you going, Maggy?" and if I says, "I ll have a Try too," and if he goes into the George and writes a letter and if he gives it me and says, "Take that one to the same place, and if the answer un I t my fault, mother!', 'm a going So and So," and if he says, "I s a good  ll give you a shilling," it ain', 'I s where I am a going to, I t you, Little Mother, that s you, you know, You em to you.', 'We will not be so particular as that, Maggy. Give them me here,', 'Well, then, come across the road, Little Mother wasn t my fault. I must do what I am told. They ought to be ashamed of themselves for telling me.', 'I think I had better go. I had better go home.', 'Don  said Clennam, ', 'But I am afraid, to leave him, I am afraid to leave any of them. When I am gone, they pervert--but they don', 'It was a very innocent commission that she undertook, poor thing. And in keeping it secret from you, she supposed, no doubt, that she was only saving you uneasiness.', 'Yes, I hope so, I hope so. But I had better go home! It was but the other day that my sister told me I had become so used to the prison that I had its tone and character. It must be so. I am sure it must be when I see these things. My place is there. I am better there, it is unfeeling in me to be here, when I can do the least thing there. Good-bye. I had far better stay at home!', 'Don  he entreated. ', 'But it is home! What else can I call home? Why should I ever forget it for a single moment?', 'You never do, dear Little Dorrit, in any good and true service.', 'I hope not, O I hope not! But it is better for me to stay there; much better, much more dutiful, much happier. Please don', 'Doyce is highly gratified by your good opinion, and desires nothing so much as that you should examine the affairs of the Works for yourself, and entirely understand them. He has handed me the keys of all his books and papers--here they are jingling in this pocket--and the only charge he has given me is "Let Mr Clennam have the means of putting himself on a perfect equality with me as to knowing whatever I know. If it should come to nothing after all, he will respect my confidence. Unless I was sure of that to begin with, I should have nothing to do with him." And there, you see, you have Daniel Doyce all over.', 'A very honourable character.', 'Oh, yes, to be sure. Not a doubt of it. Odd, but very honourable. Very odd though. Now, would you believe, Clennam, s eccentricity,  s-his-name Yard--', 'Bleeding Heart?', 'A whole morning in Bleeding Heart Yard, before I could induce him to pursue the subject at all?', 'How was that?', 'How was that, my friend? I no sooner mentioned your name in connection with it than he declared off.', 'Declared off on my account?', 'I no sooner mentioned your name, Clennam, than he said, "That will never do!" What did he mean by that? I asked him. No matter, Meagles; that would never do. Why would it never do? You  said Mr Meagles, laughing within himself,  s Cathedral. "Whereas," says he, "Mr Clennam might now believe, if I entertained his proposition, that I had a sinister and designing motive in what was open free speech. Which I can', 't bear," says he, "which I really am too proud to bear."', 'I should as soon suspect--', 'Of course you would, and so I told him. But it took a morning to scale that wall; and I doubt if any other man than myself (he likes me of old) could have got his leg over it. Well, Clennam. This business-like obstacle surmounted, he then stipulated that before resuming with you I should look over the books and form my own opinion. I looked over the books, and formed my own opinion. "Is it, on the whole, for, or against?" says he. "For," says I. "Then," says he, "you may now, my good friend, give Mr Clennam the means of forming his opinion. To enable him to do which, without bias and with perfect freedom, I shall go out of town for a week." And he  said Mr Meagles;  s the rich conclusion of the thing.', 's gone, that', 'Leaving me, with a high sense, I must say, of his candour and his--', 'Oddity, I should think so!', 'And now, you can begin to look into matters as soon as you think proper. I have undertaken to explain where you may want explanation, but to be strictly impartial, and to do nothing more.', 'And I may now avow, Mr Clennam, that if I had looked high and low for a partner, I believe I could not have found one more to my mind.', 'I say the same,', 'And I say of both of you, that you are well matched. You keep him in check, Clennam, with your common sense, and you stick to the Works, Dan, with your--', 'Uncommon sense?', 'You may call it so, if you like--and each of you will be a right hand to the other. Here', 'Good gracious, Arthur,--I should say Mr Clennam, far more proper--the climb we have had to get up here and how ever to get down again without a fire-escape and Mr F.', 'Most unkind never to have come back to see us since that day, though naturally it was not to be expected that there should be any attraction at _our_ house and you were much more pleasantly engaged, that', 'And to think of Doyce and Clennam, and who Doyce can be, delightful man no doubt and married perhaps or perhaps a daughter, now has he really? then one understands the partnership and sees it all, don', 'delightful man no doubt and married perhaps or perhaps a daughter, now has he really? then one understands the partnership and sees it all, don', 'Dear Arthur--force of habit, Mr Clennam every way more delicate and adapted to existing circumstances--I must beg to be excused for taking the liberty of this intrusion but I thought I might so far presume upon old times for ever faded never more to bloom as to call with Mr F.', 'I am very happy to see you, and I thank you, Flora, very much for your kind remembrance.', 'More than I can say myself at any rate, for I might have been dead and buried twenty distinct times over and no doubt whatever should have been before you had genuinely remembered Me or anything like it in spite of which one last remark I wish to make, one last explanation I wish to offer--', 'My dear Mrs Finching,', 'Oh not that disagreeable name, say Flora!', 'Flora, is it worth troubling yourself afresh to enter into explanations? I assure you none are needed. I am satisfied--I am perfectly satisfied.', 'There', 'One last remark, I was going to say I wish to make one last explanation I wish to offer, Mr F.', 'Pray say nothing in the way of apology, You are always welcome.', 'Very polite of you to say so Arthur--cannot remember Mr Clennam until the word is out, such is the habit of times for ever fled, and so true it is that oft in the stilly night ere slumber t say me though there was a time but that is past and stern reality has now my gracious never mind--does not look like it you must confess.', 'Though indeed, nothing else is to be expected and why should it be expected and if it t you don s and I did it for the best.', 'My good Flora, we settled that before. It was all quite right.', 'It  returned Flora,  t known it to be China I should have guessed myself the Polar regions, dear Mr Clennam you are right however and I cannot blame you but as to Doyce and Clennam papa', 'No, no, don', 'What nonsense not to say it Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--easier and less trying to me than Mr Clennam--when I know it and you know it too and can', 'But I do deny it, Flora. I should soon have made you a friendly visit.', 'Ah! I dare say! However when Pancks told us I made up my mind that Mr F. s anything to do instead of putting it out.', 'When you say Her, do you mean Mr F.', 'My goodness, Arthur--Doyce and Clennam really easier to me with old remembrances--who ever heard of Mr F.', 'Going out by the day! Do you speak of Little Dorrit?', 'Why yes of course, and of all the strangest names I ever heard the strangest, like a place down in the country with a turnpike, or a favourite pony or a puppy or a bird or something from a seed-shop to be put in a garden or a flower-pot and come up speckled.', 'Then, Flora, Mr Casby was so kind as to mention Little Dorrit to you, was he? What did he say?', 'Mr Casby was so kind as to mention Little Dorrit to you, was he? What did he say?', 'Oh you know what papa is, and how aggravatingly he sits looking beautiful and turning his thumbs over and over one another till he makes one giddy if one keeps one t know who began the subject Arthur (Doyce and Clennam) but I am sure it wasn', 'Certainly, By all means.', 'You are very ready, that I must admit, Papa said you had spoken of her in an earnest way and I said what I have told you and that', 'That', 'Except that when Pancks told us of your having embarked in this business and with difficulty persuaded us that it was really you I said to Mr F. s and I know that your mama has a very touchy temper Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--or I never might have married Mr F. and might have been at this hour but I am running into nonsense.', 'It was very kind of you, Flora, to think of this.', 'I think, Flora, that the employment you can give Little Dorrit, and the kindness you can show her--', 'Yes and I will,', 'I am sure of it--will be a great assistance and support to her. I do not feel that I have the right to tell you what I know of her, for I acquired the knowledge confidentially, and under circumstances that bind me to silence. But I have an interest in the little creature, and a respect for her that I cannot express to you. Her life has been one of such trial and devotion, and such quiet goodness, as you can scarcely imagine. I can hardly think of her, far less speak of her, without feeling moved. Let that feeling represent what I could tell you, and commit her to your friendliness with my thanks.', 'I heard from Flora, that she was coming to call, coming to call. And being out, I thought I d come also.', 'that she was coming to call, coming to call. And being out, I thought I d come also.', 'Mrs Finching has been telling me, sir, that she hopes occasionally to employ the young needlewoman you recommended to my mother. For which I have been thanking her.', 'You didn  said Pancks;  t. The name was mentioned to you, and you passed it on. That', 'Well! As she justifies any recommendation, it is much the same thing.', 'You are glad she turns out well, but it wouldn s not yours as it is, and the blame wouldn', 'You are not acquainted, then, with any of her family?', 'with any of her family?', 'Acquainted with any of her family? How should you be acquainted with any of her family? You never heard of  t be acquainted with people you never heard of, can you? You should think not!', 'As to being a reference, you know, in a general way, what being a reference means. It d all be references for one another, if you em. What would be the good of letting  s no satisfaction to be done by two men instead of one. One t pay, gets another person who can t make either of them able to do a walking match. And four wooden legs are more troublesome to you than two, when you don', 'You can t do it when your Uncle George was living; much less when he', 'He let him chuck her out of winder; Him', 'Him', 'Mr F.', 'All right, sir,', 'I am so unfortunate as to have awakened a strong animosity in the breast of that lady, Do you know why?', 'Does _she_ know why?', 'I suppose not.', '_I_ suppose not,', 'Mr Clennam, I am in want of information, sir.', 'Connected with this firm?', 'No,', 'With what then, Mr Pancks? That is to say, assuming that you want it of me.', 'Yes, sir; yes, I want it of you, if I can persuade you to furnish it. A, B, C, D. DA, DE, DI, DO. Dictionary order. Dorrit. That', 'I don', 'That', 'And what do you want to know?', 'Whatever you can and will tell me.', 'This is a singular visit, Mr Pancks. It strikes me as rather extraordinary that you should come, with such an object, to me.', 'It may be all extraordinary together, It may be out of the ordinary course, and yet be business. In short, it is business. I am a man of business. What business have I in this present world, except to stick to business? No business.', 'Now, to put this business on its own footing, it s.', 'Do you refer to Mr Casby as your proprietor?', 'Well?', 'Well, sir, say, I come to him. Say, here I am.', 'Mr Pancks, not to trespass on your grounds of mystery, I will be as plain with you as I can. Let me ask two questions. First--', 'All right! I see! "What', 'Exactly.', 'Motive, good. Nothing to do with my proprietor; not stateable at present, ridiculous to state at present; but good. Desiring to serve young person, name of Dorrit, Better admit motive to be good.', 'Secondly, and lastly, what do you want to know?', 'In conclusion, Mr Pancks, I have but to say this. I have reasons beyond a personal regard for speaking as little as I can of the Dorrit family, particularly at my mother  (Mr Pancks nodded), ', 'and for knowing as much as I can. So devoted a man of business as you are--eh?', 'It', 'So devoted a man of business as yourself has a perfect understanding of a fair bargain. I wish to make a fair bargain with you, that you shall enlighten me concerning the Dorrit family when you have it in your power, as I have enlightened you. It may not give you a very flattering idea of my business habits, that I failed to make my terms beforehand, but I prefer to make them a point of honour. I have seen so much business done on sharp principles that, to tell you the truth, Mr Pancks, I am tired of them.', 'Ay, ay. You do take a reference sometimes, I see?', 'When he can pay, sir, Take all you can get, and keep back all you can s business. The lame foreigner with the stick wants a top room down the Yard. Is he good for it?', 'I am, and I will answer for him.', 'That  said Pancks, making a note of the case in his book,  s the watchword down the Yard. The lame foreigner with the stick represented that you sent him; but he could represent (as far as that goes) that the Great Mogul sent him. He has been in the hospital, I believe?', 'Yes. Through having met with an accident. He is only just now discharged.', 'It', 'I have been shown so too,', 'A very bad day s work. It seems to me, sir, and I must insist on making this observation forcibly in justice to myself, that you ought to have got much more money, much more money.', 'There  Plornish growled,  s head off, dear me!', 'But she s Mr Casby t well off, none better, it an', 'And what she come to our place for, was to leave word that if Miss Dorrit would step up to that card--which it s house that is, and Pancks he has a office at the back, where he really does, beyond belief--she would be glad for to engage her. She was a old and a dear friend, she said particular, of Mr Clennam, and hoped for to prove herself a useful friend to _his_ friend. Them was her words. Wishing to know whether Miss Dorrit could come to-morrow morning, I said I would see you, Miss, and inquire, and look round there to-night, to say yes, or, if you was engaged to-morrow, when?', 'I can go to-morrow, thank you, This is very kind of you, but you are always kind.', 'Really so sorry that I should happen to be late on this morning of all mornings because my intention and my wish was to be ready to meet you when you came in and to say that any one that interested Arthur Clennam half so much must interest me and that I gave you the heartiest welcome and was so glad, instead of which they never called me and there I still am snoring I dare say if the truth was known and if you don t I dare say besides Jews and theirs are scruples of conscience which we must all respect though I must say I wish they had them equally strong when they sell us false articles for real that certainly ain', 'Oh nonsense my dear child I can never hear of that, You are coming here on the footing of a friend and companion you know if you will let me take that liberty and I should be ashamed of myself indeed if you could come here upon any other, besides which Arthur Clennam spoke in such terms--you are tired my dear.', 'No, ma', 'You turn so pale you have walked too far before breakfast and I dare say live a great way off and ought to have had a ride, dear dear is there anything that would do you good?', 'dear dear is there anything that would do you good?', 'Indeed I am quite well, ma', 'Then take your tea at once I beg, and this wing of fowl and bit of ham, don s Aunt who breakfasts in bed and a charming old lady too and very clever, Portrait of Mr F. behind the door and very like though too much forehead and as to a pillar with a marble pavement and balustrades and a mountain, I never saw him near it nor not likely in the wine trade, excellent man but not at all in that way.', 'Mr F. was so devoted to me that he never could bear me out of his sight, though of course I am unable to say how long that might have lasted if he hadn', 'Romance, however, s Aunt as I openly said to Mr F. when he proposed to me and you will be surprised to hear that he proposed seven times once in a hackney-coach once in a boat once in a pew once on a donkey at Tunbridge Wells and the rest on his knees, Romance was fled with the early days of Arthur Clennam, our parents tore us asunder we became marble and stern reality usurped the throne, Mr F. said very much to his credit that he was perfectly aware of it and even preferred that state of things accordingly the word was spoken the fiat went forth and such is life you see my dear and yet we do not break but bend, pray make a good breakfast while I go in with the tray.', 'You see, my dear, I am obliged to be careful to follow the directions of my medical man though the flavour is anything but agreeable being a poor creature and it may be have never recovered the shock received in youth from too much giving way to crying in the next room when separated from Arthur, have you known him long?', 'To be sure you couldn  returned Flora,  s very true unless tea, so it was at his mother', 'for travelling-people usually get more or less mahogany and you are not at all so and as to corresponding what about? that s was it really that you knew him first, highly sensible and firm but dreadfully severe--ought to be the mother of the man in the iron mask.', 'Mrs Clennam has been kind to me,', 'Really? I am sure I am glad to hear it because as Arthur s naturally pleasant to my feelings to have a better opinion of her than I had before, though what she thinks of me when I run on as I am certain to do and she sits glowering at me like Fate in a go-cart--shocking comparison really--invalid and not her fault--I never know or can imagine.', 'Shall I find my work anywhere, ma  asked Little Dorrit, looking timidly about; ', 'You industrious little fairy, there s better that we should begin by being confidential about our mutual friend--too cold a word for me at least I don ll excuse my bringing up for of all the tiresome boys that will go tumbling into every sort of company that boy', 'What nimble fingers you have, but are you sure you are well?', 'Oh yes, indeed!', 'You must know my dear, but that I have no doubt you know already not only because I have already thrown it out in a general way but because I feel I carry it stamped in burning what', 'To paint, the emotions of that morning when all was marble within and Mr F. s Aunt brought home like the fifth of November in a rush-bottomed chair I will not attempt, suffice it to say that the hollow form of breakfast took place in the dining-room downstairs that papa partaking too freely of pickled salmon was ill for weeks and that Mr F. and myself went upon a continental tour to Calais where the people fought for us on the pier until they separated us though not for ever that was not yet to be.', 'I will draw a veil over that dreamy life, Mr F. was in good spirits his appetite was good he liked the cookery he considered the wine weak but palatable and all was well, we returned to the immediate neighbourhood of Number Thirty Little Gosling Street London Docks and settled down, ere we had yet fully detected the housemaid in selling the feathers out of the spare bed Gout flying upwards soared with Mr F. to another sphere.', 'I revere the memory of Mr F. as an estimable man and most indulgent husband, only necessary to mention Asparagus and it appeared or to hint at any little delicate thing to drink and it came like magic in a pint bottle it was not ecstasy but it was comfort, I returned to papa', 'Ask me not, if I love him still or if he still loves me or what the end is to be or when, we are surrounded by watchful eyes and it may be that we are destined to pine asunder it may be never more to be reunited not a word not a breath not a look to betray us all must be secret as the tomb wonder not therefore that even if I should seem comparatively cold to Arthur or Arthur should seem comparatively cold to me we have fatal reasons it is enough if we understand them hush!', 'Hush! I have now told you all, confidence is established between us hush, for Arthur s name you may always rely upon me.', 'It is only that I feel a little overcome by your kindness, and by Mr Clennam', 'Well really my dear, it t undertake to say after all, but it doesn', 'I have always been strong enough to do what I want to do, and I shall be quite well directly, You have overpowered me with gratitude, that', 'You have overpowered me with gratitude, that', 'Find it a little dull, Miss Dorrit?', 'No, thank you, sir,', 'Busy, I see, What are those now, Miss Dorrit?', 'What are those now, Miss Dorrit?', 'Handkerchiefs.', 'Are they, though! I shouldn  Not in the least looking at them, but looking at Little Dorrit. ', 'I belong body and soul to my proprietor, you saw my proprietor having his dinner below. But I do a little in the other way, sometimes; privately, very privately, Miss Dorrit.', 'Years of toil, eh? But what else are we made for? Nothing. Hallo! What s a College! And what s a father! And what s an uncle! And what s a sister! And what s a brother! And what em all? Why, this is you, Miss Dorrit!', 'Now, the deuce is in it, if this isn s behind me?', 'Is it any harm?', 'Deuce a bit! What do you think it', 'I ought to ask you that. I am not the fortune-teller.', 'True, What', 'Ah! That  said Pancks, pointing at her. ', 'Not that, Don t take on to mind me. Don', 'I hardly know what to say, Why?', 'Why?', 'Because I am a fortune-teller. Pancks the gipsy. I haven s behind me on that little hand. I have told you you shall live to see. Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?', 'Agreed that I--am--to--', 'To take no notice of me away from here, unless I take on first. Not to mind me when I come and go. It ll tell the rest of my fortune one day--I shall live to know it." Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?', 'Ye-es, I suppose so, while you do no harm.', 'Good! Honest creature, woman of capital points, but heedless and a loose talker, Miss Dorrit.', 'Please, Little Mother, you must come down and see him. He', 'Who, Maggy?', 'Who, o s in your father s only me.', 'I am not very well, Maggy. I had better not go. I am going to lie down. See! I lie down now, to ease my head. Say, with my grateful regard, that you left me so, or I would have come.', 'Well, it an  said the staring Maggy, ', 'It', 'Well, and if you cry to ease your head, Little Mother, let me cry too. Don  expostulated Maggy,  t not being greedy.', 'He was very sorry, I can tell you, and wanted to send a doctor. And he t think he  hearing about your head, Little Mother. Oh my! Ain', 'I think I have, a little, Maggy.', 'A little! Oh!', 'But it', 'Now, Little Mother, let un!', 'What shall it be about, Maggy?', 'Oh, let  said Maggy,  lar one. Beyond all belief, you know!', 'Maggy, there was once upon a time a fine King, and he had everything he could wish for, and a great deal more. He had gold and silver, diamonds and rubies, riches of every kind. He had palaces, and he had--', 'Hospitals, Let him have hospitals, because they', 'Yes, he had plenty of them, and he had plenty of everything.', 'Plenty of baked potatoes, for instance?', 'Plenty of everything.', 'Lor! Wasn', 'This King had a daughter, who was the wisest and most beautiful Princess that ever was seen. When she was a child she understood all her lessons before her masters taught them to her; and when she was grown up, she was the wonder of the world. Now, near the Palace where this Princess lived, there was a cottage in which there was a poor little tiny woman, who lived all alone by herself.', 'An old woman,', 'No, not an old woman. Quite a young one.', 'I wonder she warn  said Maggy. ', 'The Princess passed the cottage nearly every day, and whenever she went by in her beautiful carriage, she saw the poor tiny woman spinning at her wheel, and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked at her. So, one day she stopped the coachman a little way from the cottage, and got out and walked on and peeped in at the door, and there, as usual, was the tiny woman spinning at her wheel, and she looked at the Princess, and the Princess looked at her.', 'Like trying to stare one another out, Please go on, Little Mother.', 'The Princess was such a wonderful Princess that she had the power of knowing secrets, and she said to the tiny woman, Why do you keep it there? This showed her directly that the Princess knew why she lived all alone by herself spinning at her wheel, and she kneeled down at the Princess', 'Lor!', 'It was the shadow of Some one who had gone by long before: of Some one who had gone on far away quite out of reach, never, never to come back. It was bright to look at; and when the tiny woman showed it to the Princess, she was proud of it with all her heart, as a great, great treasure. When the Princess had considered it a little while, she said to the tiny woman, And you keep watch over this every day? And she cast down her eyes, and whispered, Yes. Then the Princess said, Remind me why. To which the other replied, that no one so good and kind had ever passed that way, and that was why in the beginning. She said, too, that nobody missed it, that nobody was the worse for it, that Some one had gone on, to those who were expecting him--', 'Some one was a man then?', '--Had gone on to those who were expecting him, and that this remembrance was stolen or kept back from nobody. The Princess made answer, Ah! But when the cottager died it would be discovered there. The tiny woman told her No; when that time came, it would sink quietly into her own grave, and would never be found.', 'Well, to be sure! Go on, please.', 'The Princess was very much astonished to hear this, as you may suppose, Maggy.', 'So she resolved to watch the tiny woman, and see what came of it. Every day she drove in her beautiful carriage by the cottage-door, and there she saw the tiny woman always alone by herself spinning at her wheel, and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked at her. At last one day the wheel was still, and the tiny woman was not to be seen. When the Princess made inquiries why the wheel had stopped, and where the tiny woman was, she was informed that the wheel had stopped because there was nobody to turn it, the tiny woman being dead.', 'That', 'Had she got to be old?', 'The tiny woman?', 'Ah!', 'I don  said Little Dorrit. ', 'Would it raly! Well, I suppose it would though.', 'Who  said Maggy. She had joined her at the window and was leaning on her shoulder. ', 'I have heard him called a fortune-teller, But I doubt if he could tell many people even their past or present fortunes.', 'Couldn', 'Nor the tiny woman hers?', 'No, But let us come away from the window.', 'I am glad, to have the distinguished gratification of making your acquaintance, sir. Your feelings do you honour. You are young; may you never outlive your feelings! If I was to outlive my own feelings, sir, if I was to outlive my own feelings, I', 'to have the distinguished gratification of making your acquaintance, sir. Your feelings do you honour. You are young; may you never outlive your feelings! If I was to outlive my own feelings, sir, if I was to outlive my own feelings, I', 'My daughter, sir, Anastatia, you are no stranger to the state of this young man --Mr Rugg might have used the word more pointedly in the singular number--', 'What I envy you, sir, is, allow me to take your hat--we are rather short of pegs--I', 'Sir, you are a young man that it does one good to come across. You are a young man that I should like to put in the witness-box, to humanise the minds of the legal profession. I hope you have brought your appetite with you, and intend to play a good knife and fork?', 'Thank you, sir, I don', 'I think I go a little beyond that, sir,', 'But in your case there  said Mr Rugg, with argumentative smile and action of hand. ', 'No, sir, certainly, I should be very sorry if there was.', 'The sentiment, is what I should have expected from your known principles. It would affect my daughter greatly, sir, if she heard it. As I perceive the mutton, I am glad she didn', 'Now, there  said Pancks. ', 'I  returned Mr Rugg, ', 'Now, there  said Pancks. ', 'I', 'Then perhaps, you', 'There s two to me. Two to me, Here s a Stone; three to me. And a Still-born Baby; four to me. And all, for the present, told.', 'I can only assure you, Mr Pancks, that I deeply regret my circumstances being such that I can s not advisable to allow me the time necessary for my doing the distances on foot; because nothing would give me greater satisfaction than to walk myself off my legs without fee or reward.', 'Mr Baptist--dust-pan! Mr Baptist--flour-dredger! Mr Baptist--coffee-biggin!', 'Now, old chap, pay up!', 'Oh! That re a quick customer. It t expect to receive it, though.', 'Oh, he  said Mrs Plornish.  ll be able to leave off his stick entirely. E ope you leg well soon.', 'He  said Mr Pancks, admiring him as if he were a mechanical toy. ', 'Why, sir, he turns out to have quite a power of carving them flowers that you see him at now. E please. Double good!', 'Can he live by that?', 'He can live on very little, sir, and it is expected as he will be able, in time, to make a very good living. Mr Clennam got it him to do, and gives him odd jobs besides in at the Works next door--makes  em.', 'And what does he do with himself, now, when he ain', 'Why, not much as yet, sir, on accounts I suppose of not being able to walk much; but he goes about the Yard, and he chats without particular understanding or being understood, and he plays with the children, and he sits in the sun--he ll sing, and he', 'Laugh! He looks to me as if every tooth in his head was always laughing.', 'But whenever he gets to the top of the steps at t  said Mrs Plornish,  ll peep out in the curiousest way! So that some of us thinks he s looking for somebody he don t know what to think.', 'What', 'Hem! It', 'Is it? Why, then Altro to you, old chap. Good afternoon. Altro!', 'Come in, come in!', 'I saw you were reading, and thought you might not care to be disturbed.', 'Are they well?', 'Yes, they are well. They are all well.', 'Any company at the cottage?', 'No, no company.', 'And how did you get on, you four?', 'There were five of us, There was What', 'Who is he?', 'Mr Henry Gowan.', 'Ah, to be sure! Yes!--I forgot him.', 'As I mentioned, you may remember, he is always there on Sunday.', 'Yes, yes, I remember now.', 'Miss Meagles is quite attached to--the--dog,', 'Quite so, More attached to the dog than I am to the man.', 'You mean Mr--?', 'I mean Mr Gowan, most decidedly,', 'Perhaps you are a little hasty in your judgment, Our judgments--I am supposing a general case--', 'Of course,', 'Are so liable to be influenced by many considerations, which, almost without our knowing it, are unfair, that it is necessary to keep a guard upon them. For instance, Mr--', 'Gowan,', 'Is young and handsome, easy and quick, has talent, and has seen a good deal of various kinds of life. It might be difficult to give an unselfish reason for being prepossessed against him.', 'Not difficult for me, I think, Clennam, I see him bringing present anxiety, and, I fear, future sorrow, into my old friend s face, the nearer he draws to, and the oftener he looks at, the face of his daughter. In short, I see him with a net about the pretty and affectionate creature whom he will never make happy.', 'We don  said Clennam, almost in the tone of a man in pain, ', 'that he will not make her happy.', 'We don  returned his partner, ', 'Well, well! we must be hopeful, and we must at least try to be, if not generous (which, in this case, we have no opportunity of being), just. We will not disparage this gentleman, because he is successful in his addresses to the beautiful object of his ambition; and we will not question her natural right to bestow her love on one whom she finds worthy of it.', 'Maybe, my friend, Maybe also, that she is too young and petted, too confiding and inexperienced, to discriminate well.', 'That, would be far beyond our power of correction.', 'Therefore, in a word, we should make up our minds that it is not worthy of us to say any ill of Mr Gowan. It would be a poor thing to gratify a prejudice against him. And I resolve, for my part, not to depreciate him.', 'I am not quite so sure of myself, and therefore I reserve my privilege of objecting to him, But, if I am not sure of myself, I am sure of you, Clennam, and I know what an upright man you are, and how much to be respected. Good night, _my_ friend and partner!', 'I quite regret you were not with us yesterday, We had an agreeable day up the river there.', 'From your partner? What a dear old fellow he is!', 'I have a great regard for him.', 'By Jove, he is the finest creature! So fresh, so green, trusts in such wonderful things!', 'He is charming! To see him mooning along to that time of life, laying down nothing by the way and picking up nothing by the way, is delightful. It warms a man. So unspoilt, so simple, such a good soul! Upon my life Mr Clennam, one feels desperately worldly and wicked in comparison with such an innocent creature. I speak for myself, let me add, without including you. You are genuine also.', 'Thank you for the compliment, you are too, I hope?', 'So so, To be candid with you, tolerably. I am not a great impostor. Buy one of my pictures, and I assure you, in confidence, it will not be worth the money. Buy one of another man ll impose upon you. They all do it.', 'All painters?', 'Painters, writers, patriots, all the rest who have stands in the market. Give almost any man I know ten pounds, and he will impose upon you to a corresponding extent; a thousand pounds--to a corresponding extent; ten thousand pounds--to a corresponding extent. So great the success, so great the imposition. But what a capital world it is! What a jolly, excellent, lovable world it is!', 'I had rather thought, that the principle you mention was chiefly acted on by--', 'By the Barnacles?', 'By the political gentlemen who condescend to keep the Circumlocution Office.', 'Ah! Don  said Gowan, laughing afresh, ', 'they are darling fellows! Even poor little Clarence, the born idiot of the family, is the most agreeable and most endearing blockhead! And by Jupiter, with a kind of cleverness in him too that would astonish you!', 'It would. Very much,', 'And after all, though I can s a school for gentlemen.', 'though I can s a school for gentlemen.', 'It', 'Ah! You are a terrible fellow, I can understand how you have frightened that little donkey, Clarence, the most estimable of moon-calves (I really love him) nearly out of his wits. But enough of him, and of all the rest of them. I want to present you to my mother, Mr Clennam. Pray do me the favour to give me the opportunity.', 'My mother lives in a most primitive manner down in that dreary red-brick dungeon at Hampton Court, If you would make your own appointment, suggest your own day for permitting me to take you there to dinner, you would be bored and she would be charmed. Really that', 'If John Barnacle, if John Barnacle had but abandoned his most unfortunate idea of conciliating the mob, all would have been well, and I think the country would have been preserved.', 'Mr Clennam, apart from the happiness I have in becoming known to you, though in this odiously inconvenient place--a mere barrack--there is a subject on which I am dying to speak to you. It is the subject in connection with which my son first had, I believe, the pleasure of cultivating your acquaintance.', 'First, now, is she really pretty?', 'Oh! You know! This flame of Henry', 'Miss Meagles, is very beautiful.', 'Men are so often mistaken on those points, that I candidly confess to you I feel anything but sure of it, even now; though it is something to have Henry corroborated with so much gravity and emphasis. He picked the people up at Rome, I think?', 'Excuse me, I doubt if I understand your expression.', 'Picked the people up, Came upon them. Found them out. Stumbled against them.', 'The people?', 'Yes. The Miggles people.', 'I really cannot say, where my friend Mr Meagles first presented Mr Henry Gowan to his daughter.', 'I am pretty sure he picked her up at Rome; but never mind where--somewhere. Now (this is entirely between ourselves), is she very plebeian?', 'Really, ma  returned Clennam, ', 'Very neat! Very happy! From which I infer that you secretly think her manner equal to her looks?', 'That', 'I travelled with my friend Mr Meagles, and his wife and daughter, during some months.', 'Really comforting, because you must have had a large experience of them. You see, Mr Clennam, this thing has been going on for a long time, and I find no improvement in it. Therefore to have the opportunity of speaking to one so well informed about it as yourself, is an immense relief to me. Quite a boon. Quite a blessing, I am sure.', 'Pardon me, but I am not in Mr Henry Gowan', 'Not in his confidence? No, No word has passed between you? No. That I can imagine. But there are unexpressed confidences, Mr Clennam; and as you have been together intimately among these people, I cannot doubt that a confidence of that sort exists in the present case. Perhaps you have heard that I have suffered the keenest distress of mind from Henry  shrugging her shoulders, ', 'Henry, is self-willed and resolute; and as these people naturally strain every nerve to catch him, I can entertain very little hope, Mr Clennam, that the thing will be broken off. I apprehend the girl', 'Mrs Gowan, I scarcely know how to acquit myself of what I feel to be a duty, and yet I must ask you for your kind consideration in attempting to discharge it. A misconception on your part, a very great misconception if I may venture to call it so, seems to require setting right. You have supposed Mr Meagles and his family to strain every nerve, I think you said--', 'Every nerve,', 'To secure Mr Henry Gowan?', 'Now that is so far, from being the case, that I know Mr Meagles to be unhappy in this matter; and to have interposed all reasonable obstacles with the hope of putting an end to it.', 'Are you really serious, Mr Clennam? Don', 'Why, don t I know that this is exactly the way to hold him? and do not these Miggles people know it, at least as well as I? Oh, shrewd people, Mr Clennam: evidently people of business! I believe Miggles belonged to a Bank. It ought to have been a very profitable Bank, if he had much to do with its management. This is very well done, indeed.', 'I beg and entreat you, ma', 'Oh, Mr Clennam, can you really be so credulous?', 'Suspicion? Not suspicion, Mr Clennam, Certainty. It is very knowingly done indeed, and seems to have taken _you_ in completely. Don', 'You have had a portentously long audience of my mother, I fervently hope she has not bored you?', 'Not at all,', 'You are evidently out of spirits, I am very much afraid my mother must have bored you dreadfully.', 'Believe me, not at all, It', 'Clennam!--Tattycoram!', 'What', 'Lost!', 'Why, bless my heart alive! What do you mean?', 'Wouldn t be got to do it; stopped at eight, and took herself off.', 'Left your house?', 'Never to come back, You don s passionate and proud character. A team of horses couldn t keep her.', 'How did it happen? Pray sit down and tell me.', 'As to how it happened, it ll not disguise from you, Clennam, that those conversations have not been of as bright a kind as I could wish; they have referred to our going away again. In proposing to do which, I have had, in fact, an object.', 'An object, s pause,  s an inclination on the part of my dear child which I am sorry for. Perhaps you guess the person. Henry Gowan.', 'I was not unprepared to hear it.', 'Well! I wish to God you had never had to hear it. However, so it is. Mother and I have done all we could to get the better of it, Clennam. We have tried tender advice, we have tried time, we have tried absence. As yet, of no use. Our late conversations have been upon the subject of going away for another year at least, in order that there might be an entire separation and breaking off for that term. Upon that question, Pet has been unhappy, and therefore Mother and I have been unhappy.', 'Well! I admit as a practical man, and I am sure Mother would admit as a practical woman, that we do, in families, magnify our troubles and make mountains of our molehills in a way that is calculated to be rather trying to people who look on--to mere outsiders, you know, Clennam. Still, Pet t you think so?', 'I do indeed think so,', 'No, sir, She couldn t have happened.', 'I said to Mother (not that it was necessary, for she would have thought it all for herself), we are practical people, my dear, and we know her story; we see in this unhappy girl some reflection of what was raging in her mother ll gloss her temper over, Mother, we won ll take advantage of some better disposition in her another time. So we said nothing. But, do what we would, it seems as if it was to be; she broke out violently one night.', 'How, and why?', 'If you ask me Why, s,  t know that I have any right to say so; she was always thoughtful and gentle.', 'The gentlest mistress in the world.', 'Thank you, Clennam, you have often seen them together. Well! We presently heard this unfortunate Tattycoram loud and angry, and before we could ask what was the matter, Pet came back in a tremble, saying she was frightened of her. Close after her came Tattycoram in a flaming rage. "I hate you all three," says she, stamping her foot at us. "I am bursting with hate of the whole house."', 'Upon which you--?', 'I? I said, count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'She was so used to do it, Clennam, that even then, such a picture of passion as you never saw, she stopped short, looked me full in the face, and counted (as I made out) to eight. But she couldn t bear it, she wouldn t, she wouldn t! What did we think she, Tattycoram, might have been if she had been caressed and cared for in her childhood, like her young mistress? As good as her? Ah! Perhaps fifty times as good. When we pretended to be so fond of one another, we exulted over her; that was what we did; we exulted over her and shamed her. And all in the house did the same. They talked about their fathers and mothers, and brothers and sisters; they liked to drag them up before her face. There was Mrs Tickit, only yesterday, when her little grandchild was with her, had been amused by the child t; and who were we that we should have a right to name her like a dog or a cat? But she didn', 'Ah, well! It was of no use trying reason then, with that vehement panting creature (Heaven knows what her mother', 'And you know no more of her?', 'No more, I have been hunting about all day. She must have gone very early and very silently. I have found no trace of her down about us.', 'Stay! You want, s reflection, ', 'Yes, assuredly; I want to give her another chance; Mother and Pet want to give her another chance; come! You yourself, want to give the poor passionate girl another chance, I know, Clennam.', 'want to give the poor passionate girl another chance, I know, Clennam.', 'It would be strange and hard indeed if I did not, when you are all so forgiving. What I was going to ask you was, have you thought of that Miss Wade?', 'I have. I did not think of her until I had pervaded the whole of our neighbourhood, and I don', 'Have you any idea where Miss Wade is to be found?', 'To tell you the truth, it', 'Here is no number,', 'No number, my dear Clennam? No anything! The very name of the street may have been floating in the air; for, as I tell you, none of my people can say where they got it from. However, it s, I thought perhaps--', 'Is she at home?', 'This is odd, Clennam,', 'Odd enough, but we have succeeded; that s a light coming!', 'I apprehend, that I know the cause of your favouring me with this visit. We may come to it at once.', 'The cause then, ma  said Mr Meagles, ', 'So I supposed.', 'Miss Wade, will you be so kind as to say whether you know anything of her?', 'Surely. I know she is here with me.', 'Then, ma  said Mr Meagles,  t forget her claims upon us, and I hope we know how to make allowances.', 'You hope to know how to make allowances? For what?', 'I think my friend would say, Miss Wade, for the passionate sense that sometimes comes upon the poor girl, of being at a disadvantage. Which occasionally gets the better of better remembrances.', 'Perhaps it would be well if Mr Meagles could see her, Miss Wade?', 'That is easily done, Come here, child.', 'See here, Here is your patron, your master. He is willing to take you back, my dear, if you are sensible of the favour and choose to go. You can be, again, a foil to his pretty daughter, a slave to her pleasant wilfulness, and a toy in the house showing the goodness of the family. You can have your droll name again, playfully pointing you out and setting you apart, as it is right that you should be pointed out and set apart. (Your birth, you know; you must not forget your birth.) You can again be shown to this gentleman', 'Tattycoram, for I', 'I don', 'No, not now, perhaps, not with that lady  she glanced at them for a moment,  ll not ask that lady whether she believes what she has said, even in the anger and ill blood in which I and my friend here equally know she has spoken, though she subdues herself, with a determination that any one who has once seen her is not likely to forget. I ll only say that you have no profession to make to me or mine, and no forgiveness to entreat; and that all in the world that I ask you to do, is, to count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.', 'Oh, Tattycoram, Tattycoram! Hear that lady s face, consider what is in that lady s influence over you--astonishing to us, and I should hardly go too far in saying terrible to us to see--is founded in passion fiercer than yours, and temper more violent than yours. What can you two be together? What can come of it?', 'I am alone here, gentlemen, Say anything you will.', 'Politeness must yield to this misguided girl, ma  said Mr Meagles,  t know what you are, but you don t hide, what a dark spirit you have within you. If it should happen that you are a woman, who, from whatever cause, has a perverted delight in making a sister-woman as wretched as she is (I am old enough to have heard of such), I warn her against you, and I warn you against yourself.', 'at her present pass; though I hope not altogether to dismiss it, even with the injury you do her so strongly before me. Excuse me for reminding you in her hearing--I must say it--that you were a mystery to all of us, and had nothing in common with any of us when she unfortunately fell in your way. I don t hide, can', 'Gentlemen! When you have concluded--Mr Clennam, perhaps you will induce your friend--', 'Not without another effort, Tattycoram, my poor dear girl, count five-and-twenty.', 'Do not reject the hope, the certainty, this kind man offers you, Turn to the friends you have not forgotten. Think once more!', 'I won  said the girl, with her bosom swelling high, and speaking with her hand held to her throat, ', 'Tattycoram, Once more yet! The only thing I ask of you in the world, my child! Count five-and-twenty!', 'As it is the last time I shall have the honour, and as you have spoken of not knowing what I am, and also of the foundation of my influence here, you may now know that it is founded in a common cause. What your broken plaything is as to birth, I am. She has no name, I have no name. Her wrong is my wrong. I have nothing more to say to you.', 'I hope the wife of your dear friend Mr Gowan, may be happy in the contrast of her extraction to this girl', 'Will you let me give you one, Mr Clennam? I gathered them as I came out of the garden. Indeed, I almost gathered them for you, thinking it so likely I might meet you. Mr Doyce arrived more than an hour ago, and told us you were walking down.', 'It is very grave here, but very pleasant at this hour. Passing along this deep shade, and out at that arch of light at the other end, we come upon the ferry and the cottage by the best approach, I think.', 'Mr Clennam, I should very much like to give you my confidence, if you would not mind having the goodness to receive it. I should have very much liked to have given it to you long ago, because--I felt that you were becoming so much our friend.', 'How can I be otherwise than proud of it at any time! Pray give it to me. Pray trust me.', 'I could never have been afraid of trusting you, I think I would have done so some time ago, if I had known how. But I scarcely know how, even now.', 'Mr Gowan, has reason to be very happy. God bless his wife and him!', 'I blame you? My dearest girl! I blame you? No!', 'And, now, Minnie Gowan, will you ask me nothing?', 'Oh! I have very much to ask of you.', 'That', 'You know how I am loved at home, and how I love home. You can hardly think it perhaps, dear Mr Clennam, seeing me going from it of my own free will and choice, but I do so dearly love it!', 'seeing me going from it of my own free will and choice, but I do so dearly love it!', 'I am sure of that, Can you suppose I doubt it?', 'No, no. But it is strange, even to me, that loving it so much and being so much beloved in it, I can bear to cast it away. It seems so neglectful of it, so unthankful.', 'My dear girl, it is in the natural progress and change of time. All homes are left so.', 'Yes, I know; but all homes are not left with such a blank in them as there will be in mine when I am gone. Not that there is any scarcity of far better and more endearing and more accomplished girls than I am; not that I am much, but that they have made so much of me!', 'I know what a change papa will feel at first, and I know that at first I cannot be to him anything like what I have been these many years. And it is then, Mr Clennam, then more than at any time, that I beg and entreat you to remember him, and sometimes to keep him company when you can spare a little while; and to tell him that you know I was fonder of him when I left him, than I ever was in all my life. For there is nobody--he told me so himself when he talked to me this very day--there is nobody he likes so well as you, or trusts so much.', 'If I do not speak of mama, it is because mama will understand me better in this action, and will feel my loss in a different way, and will look forward in a different manner. But you know what a dear, devoted mother she is, and you will remember her too; will you not?', 'And, dear Mr Clennam, because papa and one whom I need not name, do not fully appreciate and understand one another yet, as they will by-and-by; and because it will be the duty, and the pride, and pleasure of my new life, to draw them to a better knowledge of one another, and to be a happiness to one another, and to be proud of one another, and to love one another, both loving me so dearly; oh, as you are a kind, true man! when I am first separated from home (I am going a long distance away), try to reconcile papa to him a little more, and use your great influence to keep him before papa', 'Dear Mr Clennam, in my happiness--for I am happy, though you have seen me crying--I cannot bear to leave any cloud between us. If you have anything to forgive me (not anything that I have wilfully done, but any trouble I may have caused you without meaning it, or having it in my power to help it), forgive me to-night out of your noble heart!', 'Good-bye!', 'Arthur, do you remember my telling you, as we walked up and down one hot morning, looking over the harbour at Marseilles, that Pet', 'Very well.', 'You remember my saying that our thoughts had never been able to separate those twin sisters, and that, in our fancy, whatever Pet was, the other was?', 'Yes, very well.', 'Arthur, I carry that fancy further to-night. I feel to-night, my dear fellow, as if you had loved my dead child very tenderly, and had lost her when she was like what Pet is now.', 'Thank you! thank you!', 'Will you come in?', 'In a little while.', 'happening to find himself in that direction,', 'Mr Casby knows, that I am not subject to changes. The change that I await here is the great change.', 'Indeed, ma  returned Mr Pancks, with a wandering eye towards the figure of the little seamstress on her knee picking threads and fraying of her work from the carpet.  am.', 'I bear what I have to bear, Do you what you have to do.', 'Thank you, ma  said Mr Pancks, ', 'You are often in this direction, are you not?', 'Why, yes, ma  said Pancks, ', 'Beg Mr Casby and his daughter not to trouble themselves, by deputy, about me. When they wish to see me, they know I am here to see them. They have no need to trouble themselves to send. You have no need to trouble yourself to come.', 'Not the least trouble, ma  said Mr Pancks.  am.', 'Thank you. Good evening.', 'Little Dorrit, what do you know of that man?', 'I don am, except that I have seen him about, and that he has spoken to me.', 'What has he said to you?', 'I don', 'Why does he come here to see you?', 'I don am,', 'You know that he does come here to see you?', 'I have fancied so, But why he should come here or anywhere for that, ma t think.', 'Tell me, Little Dorrit, have you many friends now?', 'Very few, ma', 'Meaning, that man?', 'Oh no, ma', 'Some friend of his, perhaps?', 'No ma  Little Dorrit earnestly shook her head. ', 'Well! It is no affair of mine. I ask, because I take an interest in you; and because I believe I was your friend when you had no other who could serve you. Is that so?', 'Yes, ma', 'We, s, which always lay upon her table. ', 'Only father and I, now. I mean, only father and I to keep regularly out of what we get.', 'Have you undergone many privations? You and your father and who else there may be of you?', 'Sometimes it has been rather hard to live, but I think not harder--as to that--than many people find it.', 'That  Mrs Clennam quickly returned.  s the truth! You are a good, thoughtful girl. You are a grateful girl too, or I much mistake you.', 'It is only natural to be that. There is no merit in being that, I am indeed.', 'Now go, Little Dorrit, or you will be late, poor child!', 'What  he asked in plain English. ', 'At you,', 'Me, madam?', 'And the dismal evening, and--and everything, And here! The wind has been and blown the door to, and I can', 'Hah! Indeed! Do you know such a name as Clennam about here?', 'Lord bless us, I should think I did, I should think I did!', 'Where about here?', 'Where! Where but here in this house? And she t stir to help herself or me, and t s out, and Lord forgive me! if I ain', 'Where but here in this house? And she t stir to help herself or me, and t s out, and Lord forgive me! if I ain', 'Where may the lady be who has lost the use of her limbs, madam?', 'Up there! Them two windows.', 'Hah! I am of a fair size, but could not have the honour of presenting myself in that room without a ladder. Now, madam, frankly--frankness is a part of my character--shall I open the door for you?', 'Yes, bless you, sir, for a dear creetur, and do it at once, for she may be a-calling to me at this very present minute, or may be setting herself a fire and burning herself to death, or there', 'Stay, my good madam! Business-hours, I apprehend, are over for the day?', 'Yes, yes, yes, Long ago.', 'Let me make, then, a fair proposal. Fairness is a part of my character. I am just landed from the packet-boat, as you may see. I am just landed from the packet-boat, madam, and have been delayed by the weather: the infernal weather! In consequence of this, madam, some necessary business that I should otherwise have transacted here within the regular hours (necessary business because money-business), still remains to be done. Now, if you will fetch any authorised neighbouring somebody to do it in return for my opening the door, I ll--', 'What the Devil is it?', 'I don ve heard the like of it over and over again,', 'Bah! Nothing! Now, my dear madam, I think you spoke of some clever personage. Will you be so good as to confront me with that genius?', 'Don', 'Not a word.', 'And don', 'Madam, I am a statue.', 'Death of my soul! Why, how did you get here?', 'Permit me, Thank you. Excuse me. Husband and wife I know, from this playfulness. Haha! Always agreeable to see that relation playfully maintained. Listen! May I suggest that somebody up-stairs, in the dark, is becoming energetically curious to know what is going on here?', 'I am afraid, I must be so troublesome as to propose a candle.', 'True, I was going to do so. Please to stand where you are while I get one.', 'Be so good, as to step into my counting-house.--It  petulantly breaking off to answer the voice up-stairs, still unsatisfied, though Affery was there, speaking in persuasive tones.  t I tell you it', 'Timorous,', 'Timorous? More courageous than ninety men in a hundred, sir, let me tell you.', 'Though an invalid?', 'Many years an invalid. Mrs Clennam. The only one of that name left in the House now. My partner.', 'My name is Blandois.', 'Blandois. I don', 'I thought it possible, that you might have been advised from Paris--', 'We have had no advice from Paris respecting anybody of the name of Blandois,', 'No?', 'No.', 'You are so like a friend of mine! Not so identically the same as I supposed when I really did for the moment take you to be the same in the dusk--for which I ought to apologise; permit me to do so; a readiness to confess my errors is, I hope, a part of the frankness of my character--still, however, uncommonly like.', 'Indeed? But I have not received any letter of advice from anywhere respecting anybody of the name of Blandois.', 'Just so,', '_Just_ so,', 'Very good, sir, Take a chair. To the extent of anything that our House can do--we are in a retired, old-fashioned, steady way of business, sir--we shall be happy to render you our best assistance. I observe, from the date of this, that we could not yet be advised of it. Probably you came over with the delayed mail that brings the advice.', 'That I came over with the delayed mail, sir, I know to the cost of my head and stomach: the detestable and intolerable weather having racked them both. You see me in the plight in which I came out of the packet within this half-hour. I ought to have been here hours ago, and then I should not have to apologise--permit me to apologise--for presenting myself so unreasonably, and frightening--no, by-the-bye, you said not frightening; permit me to apologise again--the esteemed lady, Mrs Clennam, in her invalid chamber above stairs.', 'Faith! I must change, and eat and drink, and be lodged somewhere. Have the kindness to advise me, a total stranger, where, and money is a matter of perfect indifference until to-morrow. The nearer the place, the better. Next door, if that', 'I must change, and eat and drink, and be lodged somewhere. Have the kindness to advise me, a total stranger, where, and money is a matter of perfect indifference until to-morrow. The nearer the place, the better. Next door, if that', 'So much for my habits! my dear sir, A citizen of the world has no habits. That I am, in my poor way, a gentleman, by Heaven! I will not deny, but I have no unaccommodating prejudiced habits. A clean room, a hot dish for dinner, and a bottle of not absolutely poisonous wine, are all I want tonight. But I want that much without the trouble of going one unnecessary inch to get it.', 'There is,  shining eyes, which were restless;  s no style about it.', 'there is a coffee-house and tavern close here, which, so far, I can recommend; but there', 'I dispense with style! Do me the honour to show me the house, and introduce me there (if I am not too troublesome), and I shall be infinitely obliged.', 'Oblige me, by presenting my card of visit. Do me the favour to add that I shall be happy to wait on Mrs Clennam, to offer my personal compliments, and to apologise for having occasioned any agitation in this tranquil corner, if it should suit her convenience to endure the presence of a stranger for a few minutes, after he shall have changed his wet clothes and fortified himself with something to eat and drink.', 'To think better of it, would be to slight a lady; to slight a lady would be to be deficient in chivalry towards the sex; and chivalry towards the sex is a part of my character!', 'Blandois, you shall turn the tables on society, my little child. Haha! Holy blue, you have begun well, Blandois! At a pinch, an excellent master in English or French; a man for the bosom of families! You have a quick perception, you have humour, you have ease, you have insinuating manners, you have a good appearance; in effect, you are a gentleman! A gentleman you shall live, my small boy, and a gentleman you shall die. You shall win, however the game goes. They shall all confess your merit, Blandois. You shall subdue the society which has grievously wronged you, to your own high spirit. Death of my soul! You are high spirited by right and by nature, my Blandois!', 'I thank you, sir, for thinking of a disabled woman like me. Few who come here on business have any remembrance to bestow on one so removed from observation. It would be idle to expect that they should have. Out of sight, out of mind. While I am grateful for the exception, I don', 'Mr Flintwinch has been connected with the House many years.', 'My husband being dead, and my son preferring another pursuit, our old House has no other representative in these days than Mr Flintwinch.', 'What do you call yourself? You have the head of two men.', 'You have the head of two men.', 'My sex disqualifies me, s direction, ', 'Faith, madam, no; I am neither born nor bred in England. In effect, I am of no country, I descend from half-a-dozen countries.', 'You have been much about the world?', 'It is true. By Heaven, madam, I have been here and there and everywhere!', 'You have no ties, probably. Are not married?', 'Madam, I adore your sex, but I am not married--never was.', 'Affery, what is the matter with you?', 'I don  said Mistress Affery, with her disengaged left hand extended towards the visitor.  t me. It', 'What does this good woman mean? How is it possible to understand this good creature?', 'It  said Mr Flintwinch, screwing himself rapidly in that direction.  t know what she means. She  he added in her ear,  re Affery, and before you', 'You  said Jeremiah, pouring out the tea himself,  s failing and breaking up; that s about. Do you take sugar, sir?', 'Thank you, no tea for me.--Pardon my observing it, but that', 'May I be permitted? Thank you. A fine old-fashioned watch, Heavy for use, but massive and genuine. I have a partiality for everything genuine. Such as I am, I am genuine myself. Hah! A gentleman', 'They are old-fashioned, too,', 'Very. But this is not so old as the watch, I think?', 'I think not.', 'Extraordinary how they used to complicate these cyphers! Now is this D. N. F.? It might be almost anything.', 'Those are the letters.', 'D. N. F. was some tender, lovely, fascinating fair-creature, I make no doubt, I adore her memory on the assumption. Unfortunately for my peace of mind, I adore but too readily. It may be a vice, it may be a virtue, but adoration of female beauty and merit constitutes three parts of my character, madam.', 'You may be heart-free here, sir, Those letters are not intended, I believe, for the initials of any name.', 'Of a motto, perhaps,', 'Of a sentence. They have always stood, I believe, for Do Not Forget!', 'And naturally, you do _not_ forget.', 'No, sir, I do not forget. To lead a life as monotonous as mine has been during many years, is not the way to forget. To lead a life of self-correction is not the way to forget. To be sensible of having (as we all have, every one of us, all the children of Adam!) offences to expiate and peace to make, does not justify the desire to forget. Therefore I have long dismissed it, and I neither forget nor wish to forget.', 'All expressed, madam, by the word "naturally," which I am proud to have had sufficient apprehension and appreciation (but without appreciation I could not be Blandois) to employ.', 'Pardon me, sir, if I doubt the likelihood of a gentleman of pleasure, and change, and politeness, accustomed to court and to be courted--', 'Oh madam! By Heaven!', '--If I doubt the likelihood of such a character quite comprehending what belongs to mine in my circumstances. Not to obtrude doctrine upon you, (for you go your own way, and the consequences are on your own head), I will say this much: that I shape my course by pilots, strictly by proved and tried pilots, under whom I cannot be shipwrecked--can not be--and that if I were unmindful of the admonition conveyed in those three letters, I should not be half as chastened as I am.', 'If I forgot my ignorances in my life of health and freedom, I might complain of the life to which I am now condemned. I never do; I never have done. If I forgot that this scene, the Earth, is expressly meant to be a scene of gloom, and hardship, and dark trial, for the creatures who are made out of its dust, I might have some tenderness for its vanities. But I have no such tenderness. If I did not know that we are, every one, the subject (most justly the subject) of a wrath that must be satisfied, and against which mere actions are nothing, I might repine at the difference between me, imprisoned here, and the people who pass that gateway yonder. But I take it as a grace and favour to be elected to make the satisfaction I am making here, to know what I know for certain here, and to work out what I have worked out here. My affliction might otherwise have had no meaning to me. Hence I would forget, and I do forget, nothing. Hence I am contented, and say it is better with me than with millions.', 'There, there, there! That is quite understood, Mrs Clennam, and you have spoken piously and well. Mr Blandois, I suspect, is not of a pious cast.', 'On the contrary, sir! Your pardon! It', 'Your pardon! It', 'With what will appear to you the egotism of a sick old woman, sir, though really through your accidental allusion, I have been led away into the subject of myself and my infirmities. Being so considerate as to visit me, I hope you will be likewise so considerate as to overlook that. Don  For he was evidently going to do it. ', 'It is a genuine old house, A place of no pretensions, but a piece of antiquity.', 'Faith! If Mr Flintwinch would do me the favour to take me through the rooms on my way out, he could hardly oblige me more. An old house is a weakness with me. I have many weaknesses, but none greater. I love and study the picturesque in all its varieties. I have been called picturesque myself. It is no merit to be picturesque--I have greater merits, perhaps--but I may be, by an accident. Sympathy, sympathy!', 'I tell you beforehand, Mr Blandois, that you  said Jeremiah, taking up the candle.  s not worth your looking at.', 'You don', 'On the contrary, Mr Flintwinch; if not tiresome to you, I shall be ravished!', 'A most admirable old house, So mysterious. Do you never hear any haunted noises here?', 'Noises, No.', 'Nor see any devils?', 'Not, not any that introduce themselves under that name and in that capacity.', 'not any that introduce themselves under that name and in that capacity.', 'Haha! A portrait here, I see.', 'It', 'May I ask the subject, Mr Flintwinch?', 'Mr Clennam, deceased. Her husband.', 'Former owner of the remarkable watch, perhaps?', 'That', 'Yes, sir, She is a remarkable woman. Great fortitude--great strength of mind.', 'They must have been very happy,', 'Who?', 'As happy as most other married people, I suppose, I can t know. There are secrets in all families.', 'Secrets! Say it again, my son.', 'I say, I say there are secrets in all families.', 'So there are, Haha! you are right. So there are! Secrets! Holy Blue! There are the devil', 'But, favour me with the candle a moment, Let us have a look at the husband of the remarkable lady. Hah! s length. ', 'Let us have a look at the husband of the remarkable lady. Hah! s length. ', 'I am glad you are so well satisfied, sir, I didn', 'In admirable spirits, Word of honour! never more refreshed in spirits. Do you ever have presentiments, Mr Flintwinch?', 'I am not sure that I know what you mean by the term, sir,', 'Say, in this case, Mr Flintwinch, undefined anticipations of pleasure to come.', 'I can m sensible of such a sensation at present, If I should find it coming on, I', 'Now I, I, my son, have a presentiment to-night that we shall be well acquainted. Do you find it coming on?', 'N-no, I can', 'I have a strong presentiment that we shall become intimately acquainted.--You have no feeling of that sort yet?', 'Not yet,', 'You will draw upon us to-morrow, sir,', 'My Cabbage, I  here he gave him a southern embrace, and kissed him soundly on both cheeks; ', 'Father will soon be home with us for good, now. Ain s a sweeter singer than ever; you d aheard him just now. s daughter, and only wondered how it was that so gifted an old gentleman had not made a fortune. This he attributed, after much reflection, to his musical genius not having been scientifically developed in his youth.   argued Mr Plornish,  ve got it in yourself? That', 'Miss Dorrit, here t he looking nice? And such voice he', 'No, they  said Mrs Plornish with a lengthening face,  t let him have half as much change and fresh air as would benefit him. But he t you, Father?', 'Yes, my dear, I hope so. In good time, please God.', 'John Edward Nandy. Sir. While there re fully welcome to your share on it. While there re fully welcome to your share on it. If so be as there should be nothing in this present roof, you should be as welcome to your share on it as if it was something, much or little. And this is what I mean and so I don', 'I thank you kindly, Thomas, and I know your intentions well, which is the same I thank you kindly for. But no, Thomas. Until such times as it s mouths, which take it is, and call it by what name you will it do remain and equally deprive, though may they come, and too soon they can not come, no Thomas, no!', 'There, Father! Ain re a regular beau yourself, Father, if ever there was one.', 'Why, good gracious me, Amy! You never mean it!', 'Mean what, Fanny dear?', 'Well! I could have believed a great deal of you, but I don', 'Fanny!', 'Oh! Don t! The idea of coming along the open streets, in the broad light of day, with a Pauper!', 'O Fanny!', 'I tell you not to Fanny me, for I', 'Does it disgrace anybody, to take care of this poor old man?', 'Yes, miss, and you ought to know it does. And you do know it does, and you do it because you know it does. The principal pleasure of your life is to remind your family of their misfortunes. And the next great pleasure of your existence is to keep low company. But, however, if you have no sense of decency, I have. You', 'No, no, No, thank you. Give me your arm again, Mr Nandy. We shall soon be there now.', 'Of course, Very proper. Poor, afflicted Pa! Now, I hope you believe me, Miss?', 'What is it, father? Have I made you unhappy, father? Not I, I hope!', 'You hope, indeed! I dare say! Oh, you you Common-minded little Amy! You complete prison-child!', 'Innocent in intention! Stuff in intention! Low in intention! Lowering of the family in intention!', 'Father! I am very sorry. Pray forgive me. Tell me how it is, that I may not do it again!', 'How it is, you prevaricating little piece of goods! You know how it is. I have told you already, so don', 'Hush! Amy, I have done what I could to keep you select here; I have done what I could to retain you a position here. I may have succeeded; I may not. You may know it; you may not. I give no opinion. I have endured everything here but humiliation. That I have happily been spared--until this day.', 'Humiliation I have happily been spared until this day. Through all my troubles there has been that--Spirit in myself, and that--that submission to it, if I may use the term, in those about me, which has spared me--ha--humiliation. But this day, this minute, I have keenly felt it.', 'Of course! How could it be otherwise? Careering and prancing about with a Pauper!', 'But, dear father, I don t! I do nothing but beg and pray you to be comforted and overlook it. But if I had not known that you were kind to the old man yourself, and took much notice of him, and were always glad to see him, I would not have come here with him, father, I would not, indeed. What I have been so unhappy as to do, I have done in mistake. I would not wilfully bring a tear to your eyes, dear love! for anything the world could give me, or anything it could take away.', 'There, there! Say no more, Amy, say no more, my child. I will forget it as soon as I can. I, I--shall soon be able to dismiss it. It is perfectly true, my dear, that I am always glad to see my old pensioner--as such, as such--and that I do--ha--extend as much protection and kindness to the--hum--the bruised reed--I trust I may so call him without impropriety--as in my circumstances, I can. It is quite true that this is the case, my dear child. At the same time, I preserve in doing this, if I may--ha--if I may use the expression--Spirit. Becoming Spirit. And there are some things which are, irreconcilable with that, and wound that--wound it deeply. It is not that I have seen my good Amy attentive, and--ha--condescending to my old pensioner--it is not _that_ that hurts me. It is, if I am to close the painful subject by being explicit, that I have seen my child, my own child, my own daughter, coming into this College out of the public streets--smiling! smiling!--arm in arm with--O my God, a livery!', 'Ah, Young John! What is it, Young John?', 'A letter for you, sir, being left in the Lodge just this minute, and a message with it, I thought, happening to be there myself, sir, I would bring it to your room. s attention was much distracted by the piteous spectacle of Little Dorrit at her father', 'Indeed, John? Thank you.', 'The letter is from Mr Clennam, sir--it  attention more distracted than before, ', 'Oh! Thank you, Young John. Quite right. Much obliged to you for your attention. No one waiting?', 'No, sir, no one waiting.', 'Thank you, John. How is your mother, Young John?', 'Thank you, sir, she s pretty well, sir.', 'Say we sent our remembrances, will you? Say kind remembrances, if you please, Young John.', 'Thank you, sir, I will.', 'There, there, Amy! let us say no more about it. Where is my old pensioner all this while? We must not leave him by himself any longer, or he will begin to suppose he is not welcome, and that would pain me. Will you fetch him, my child, or shall I?', 'If you wouldn', 'Certainly I will go, my dear. I forgot; your eyes are rather red. There! Cheer up, Amy. Don', 'I would rather stay in my own room, Father, I would far rather not see Mr Clennam.', 'Oh, fie, fie, my dear, that t think of your not being here to receive Mr Clennam, my dear, especially this afternoon. So go and freshen yourself up, Amy; go and freshen yourself up, like a good girl.', 'An old acquaintance of mine, sir, an old pensioner. Be covered, my good Nandy; put your hat on,', 'Amy, my love, you know Mr Clennam even better than I have the happiness of doing. Fanny, my dear, you are acquainted with Mr Clennam. This, Mr Clennam, you must know, is an old pensioner of mine, Old Nandy, a very faithful old man. Let me see. You know Plornish, I think? I think my daughter Amy has mentioned to me that you know poor Plornish?', 'O yes!', 'Well, sir, this is Mrs Plornish', 'Indeed? I am glad to see him.', 'You would be more glad if you knew his many good qualities, Mr Clennam.', 'I hope I shall come to know them through knowing him,', 'It is a holiday with him, and he comes to see his old friends, who are always glad to see him, Union, poor old fellow. Out for the day.', 'Not ready for more ham yet, Nandy? Why, how slow you are! (His last teeth, are going, poor old boy.', 'No, sir; no. I haven', 'No, to be sure, Very natural. Legs going.', 'John Edward, How old, sir? Let me think now.', 'John Edward, sir? Well, I really forget. I couldn s two and two months, or whether it s one or the other.', 'Don  he returned, with infinite forbearance. (', 'We don  he said, putting one in his hand. ', 'Honoured sir, I thank you. It shall buy tobacco. My thanks and duty to Miss Amy and Miss Fanny. I wish you good night, Mr Clennam.', 'And mind you don  said the Father.   With that he stood on the landing, watching the old man down: and when he came into the room again, said, with a solemn satisfaction on him,  t feel it himself. The poor old fellow is a dismal wreck. Spirit broken and gone--pulverised--crushed out of him, sir, completely!', 'Tip, dear, don', 'Yes, I see, Amy. If you refer to the presence of any visitor you have here--I say, if you refer to that, I see!', 'Is that all you say?', 'That  added the lofty young man, after a moment that visitor will understand me, when I say that t used me like a gentleman.', 'I do not understand that,', 'No? Why, then, to make it clearer to you, sir, I beg to let you know that when I address what I call a properly-worded appeal, and an urgent appeal, and a delicate appeal, to an individual, for a small temporary accommodation, easily within his power--easily within his power, mind!--and when that individual writes back word to me that he begs to be excused, I consider that he doesn', 'How dare you--', 'Now, don s bosh. As to the fact of the line of conduct I choose to adopt towards the individual present, you ought to be proud of my showing a proper spirit.', 'I should think so!', 'A proper spirit? Yes, a proper spirit; a becoming spirit. Is it come to this that my son teaches me--_me_--spirit!', 'Now, don s an end of it.', 'But there is not an end of it, sir, But there shall not be an end of it. You have made up your mind? You have made up your mind?', 'Yes, _I_ have. What', 'Because, you had no right to make up your mind to what is monstrous, to what is--ha--immoral, to what is--hum--parricidal. No, Mr Clennam, I beg, sir. Don', 'Why, what is it to you, father?', 'What is it to me, sir? I have a--hum--a spirit, sir, that will not endure it. I, I am outraged and insulted by it. Let me suppose the case that I myself may at a certain time--ha--or times, have made a--hum--an appeal, and a properly-worded appeal, and a delicate appeal, and an urgent appeal to some individual for a small temporary accommodation. Let me suppose that that accommodation could have been easily extended, and was not extended, and that that individual informed me that he begged to be excused. Am I to be told by my own son, that I therefore received treatment not due to a gentleman, and that I--ha--I submitted to it?', 'You are putting it on yourself, father, and getting into all this injury of your own accord! What I have made up my mind about has nothing to do with you. What I said had nothing to do with you. Why need you go trying on other people', 'I reply it has everything to do with me, I point out to you, sir, with indignation, that--hum--the--ha--delicacy and peculiarity of your father', 'I see precious well, that I shall get no sensible or fair argument here to-night, and so the best thing I can do is to cut. Good night, Amy. Don t altogether part with my spirit, even for your sake, old girl.', 'Such, you see, Mr Clennam, are the incongruities of my position here. But a public duty! No man, I am sure, would more readily recognise a public duty than yourself.', 'Amy, my dear, if you can persuade Mr Clennam to stay longer, I can leave the honours of our poor apology for an establishment with confidence in your hands, and perhaps you may do something towards erasing from Mr Clennam', 'My dear sir, s hand, combining to express the safe receipt of his note and enclosure that afternoon, ', 'How seldom I have seen you lately, Little Dorrit!', 'I have been busy, sir.', 'But I heard only to-day, by mere accident, of your having been with those good people close by me. Why not come to me, then?', 'I--I don', 'My child, your manner is so changed!', 'My own Little Dorrit,', 'I cannot bear, to see you weep; but I hope this is a relief to an overcharged heart.', 'Yes it is, sir. Nothing but that.', 'Well, well! I feared you would think too much of what passed here just now. It is of no moment; not the least. I am only unfortunate to have come in the way. Let it go by with these tears. It is not worth one of them. One of them? Such an idle thing should be repeated, with my glad consent, fifty times a day, to save you a moment', 'You are so good! But even if there was nothing else in it to be sorry for and ashamed of, it is such a bad return to you--', 'Hush! Forgetfulness in you who remember so many and so much, would be new indeed. Shall I remind you that I am not, and that I never was, anything but the friend whom you agreed to trust? No. You remember it, don', 'Forgetfulness in you who remember so many and so much, would be new indeed. Shall I remind you that I am not, and that I never was, anything but the friend whom you agreed to trust? No. You remember it, don', 'I try to do so, or I should have broken the promise just now, when my mistaken brother was here. You will consider his bringing-up in this place, and will not judge him hardly, poor fellow, I know! You have not been ill, Mr Clennam?', 'No.', 'Nor tried? Nor hurt?', 'To speak the truth, I have been a little troubled, but it is over. Do I show it so plainly? I ought to have more fortitude and self-command than that. I thought I had. I must learn them of you. Who could teach me better!', 'But it brings me to something that I wish to say, and therefore I will not quarrel even with my own face for telling tales and being unfaithful to me. Besides, it is a privilege and pleasure to confide in my Little Dorrit. Let me confess then, that, forgetting how grave I was, and how old I was, and how the time for such things had gone by me with the many years of sameness and little happiness that made up my long life far away, without marking it--that, forgetting all this, I fancied I loved some one.', 'Do I know her, sir?', 'No, my child.', 'Not the lady who has been kind to me for your sake?', 'Flora. No, no. Do you think--', 'I never quite thought so, I did wonder at it a little.', 'Well! I found out my mistake, and I thought about it a little--in short, a good deal--and got wiser. Being wiser, I counted up my years and considered what I am, and looked back, and looked forward, and found that I should soon be grey. I found that I had climbed the hill, and passed the level ground upon the top, and was descending quickly.', 'I found that the day when any such thing would have been graceful in me, or good in me, or hopeful or happy for me or any one in connection with me, was gone, and would never shine again.', 'All that is over, and I have turned my face from it. Why do I speak of this to Little Dorrit? Why do I show you, my child, the space of years that there is between us, and recall to you that I have passed, by the amount of your whole life, the time that is present to you?', 'Because you trust me, I hope. Because you know that nothing can touch you without touching me; that nothing can make you happy or unhappy, but it must make me, who am so grateful to you, the same.', 'For those reasons assuredly, Little Dorrit, but for another too. So far removed, so different, and so much older, I am the better fitted for your friend and adviser. I mean, I am the more easily to be trusted; and any little constraint that you might feel with another, may vanish before me. Why have you kept so retired from me? Tell me.', 'I am better here. My place and use are here. I am much better here,', 'So you said that day upon the bridge. I thought of it much afterwards. Have you no secret you could entrust to me, with hope and comfort, if you would!', 'Secret? No, I have no secret,', 'I say! Little Mother!', 'Yes, Maggy.', 'If you an', 'The Princess had a secret? What Princess was that, Maggy?', 'Lor! How you do go and bother a gal of ten, catching the poor thing up in that way. Whoever said the Princess had a secret? _I_ never said so.', 'I beg your pardon. I thought you did.', 'No, I didn other one says to her, no I don other one says to her, yes you do; and then they both goes to the cupboard, and there it is. And she wouldn lar good secret, that was!', 'Little Dorrit, another word. I have wanted very much to say this to you; I have tried for opportunities. Don', 'It may be, dear Little Dorrit.', 'No. No. No.', 'But, if it ever should be, tell me so, my dear child. Entrust the truth to me, point out the object of such an interest to me, and I will try with all the zeal, and honour, and friendship and respect that I feel for you, good Little Dorrit of my heart, to do you a lasting service.', 'O thank you, thank you! But, O no, O no, O no!', 'I press for no confidence now. I only ask you to repose unhesitating trust in me.', 'Can I do less than that, when you are so good!', 'Then you will trust me fully? Will have no secret unhappiness, or anxiety, concealed from me?', 'Almost none.', 'And you have none now?', 'When I lie down to-night, and my thoughts come back--as they will, for they do every night, even when I have not seen you--to this sad place, I may believe that there is no grief beyond this room, now, and its usual occupants, which preys on Little Dorrit', 'Pancks the gipsy, fortune-telling.', 'I am spending the evening with the rest of   said Pancks.  ve been singing. I t know anything about it. Never mind. I s all the same, if you', 'How d  said Pancks.  t mind my running round, and looking in for a moment. Mr Clennam I heard was here, from Mr Dorrit. How are you, Sir?', 'Gay! I t stop a minute, or I shall be missed, and I don em to miss me.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'I haven ll go and support him!" I ought to be down in Bleeding Heart Yard by rights; but I can worry them to-morrow.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'Capital company here, Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'Don s one of us. We agreed that you shouldn t mean Mr Clennam. He s in it. An', 'I was making a remark, but I declare I forget what it was. Oh, I know! Capital company here. I em all round.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'Very generous of you,', 'Not at all, Don m coming into my property, that ll give ', 'em a treat here. Tables laid in the yard. Bread in stacks. Pipes in faggots. Tobacco in hayloads. Roast beef and plum-pudding for every one. Quart of double stout a head. Pint of wine too, if they like it, and the authorities give permission.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'And oh, by-the-bye! you were to live to know what was behind us on that little hand of yours. And so you shall, you shall, my darling.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?', 'But I shall be missed; and I don em to miss me. Mr Clennam, you and I made a bargain. I said you should find me stick to it. You shall find me stick to it now, sir, if you', 'What is it, for Heaven', 'Stop a moment, sir. Mr Rugg. Let me introduce him.', 'Mr Clennam, Mr Rugg, Stop a moment. Come to the pump.', 'I am the clearer for that, But upon my soul, to hear her father making speeches in that chair, knowing what we know, and to see her up in that room in that dress, knowing what we know, is enough to--give me a back, Mr Rugg--a little higher, sir,--that', 'But upon my soul, to hear her father making speeches in that chair, knowing what we know, and to see her up in that room in that dress, knowing what we know, is enough to--give me a back, Mr Rugg--a little higher, sir,--that', 'Stay! You have made a discovery.', 'Does it implicate any one?', 'How implicate, sir?', 'In any suppression or wrong dealing of any kind?', 'Not a bit of it.', 'Thank God! Now show me.', 'You are to understand Where s Schedule number four, Mr Rugg? Oh! all right! Here we are.--You are to understand that we are this very day virtually complete. We shan ve been at it night and day for I don t say. You s that rough total, Mr Rugg? Oh! Here we are! There sir! That ll have to break to her. That man', 'My dear soul, s hand with this fan after a little indifferent conversation,  s that I told you of, is to take place. Now, how does it strike you? I am dying to know, because you represent and express Society so well.', 'As to marriage on the part of a man, my dear, Society requires that he should retrieve his fortunes by marriage. Society requires that he should gain by marriage. Society requires that he should found a handsome establishment by marriage. Society does not see, otherwise, what he has to do with marriage. Bird, be quiet!', 'Cases there are, cases there are where a man is not young or elegant, and is rich, and has a handsome establishment already. Those are of a different kind. In such cases--', 'But, young men, and by young men you know what I mean, my love--I mean people  said Mrs Merdle, leaning back in her nest and putting up her glass again, ', 'But it is true,', 'My dear, it is not to be disputed for a moment, because Society has made up its mind on the subject, and there is nothing more to be said. If we were in a more primitive state, if we lived under roofs of leaves, and kept cows and sheep and creatures instead of banker t live under leaves, and keep cows and sheep and creatures. I perfectly exhaust myself sometimes, in pointing out the distinction to Edmund Sparkler.', 'because Society has made up its mind on the subject, and there is nothing more to be said. If we were in a more primitive state, if we lived under roofs of leaves, and kept cows and sheep and creatures instead of banker t live under leaves, and keep cows and sheep and creatures. I perfectly exhaust myself sometimes, in pointing out the distinction to Edmund Sparkler.', 'My love, you know the wretched state of the country--those unfortunate concessions of John Barnacle', 'A church mouse?', 'I was thinking of the other proverbial church person--Job, Either will do. It would be idle to disguise, consequently, that there is a wide difference between the position of your son and mine. I may add, too, that Henry has talent--', 'Which Edmund certainly has not,', '--and that his talent, combined with disappointment, has led him into a pursuit which--ah dear me! You know, my dear. Such being Henry', 'And then, my dear, I should be glad to hear what you have to say to it.', 'Sounds mercenary to ask what the gentleman is to get with the lady, but Society is perhaps a little mercenary, you know, my dear.', 'From what I can make out, I believe I may say that Henry will be relieved from debt--', 'Much in debt?', 'Why tolerably, I should think,', 'Meaning the usual thing; I understand; just so,', 'And that the father will make them an allowance of three hundred a-year, or perhaps altogether something more, which, in Italy-', 'Oh! Going to Italy?', 'For Henry to study. You need be at no loss to guess why, my dear. That dreadful Art--', 'And that, that  repeated Mrs Gowan, furling her green fan for the moment, and tapping her chin with it (it was on the way to being a double chin; might be called a chin and a half at present),  s all! On the death of the old people, I suppose there will be more to come; but how it may be restricted or locked up, I don', 'And that is all, my dear? Well, well! The fault is not yours. You have nothing to reproach yourself with. You must exercise the strength of mind for which you are renowned, and make the best of it.', 'The girl  said Mrs Gowan, ', 'Of course they have, my dear,', 'I have persisted in every possible objection, and have worried myself morning, noon, and night, for means to detach Henry from the connection.', 'No doubt you have, my dear,', 'And all of no use. All has broken down beneath me. Now tell me, my love. Am I justified in at last yielding my most reluctant consent to Henry', 'I beg your pardon, I didn', 'Eh? Yes? What is it?', 'What is it? It is, I suppose, that you have not heard a word of my complaint.', 'Your complaint, Mrs Merdle? I didn', 'A complaint of you,', 'Oh! A complaint of me, What is the--what have I--what may you have to complain of in me, Mrs Merdle?', 'You were saying, Mrs Merdle, that you had a complaint against me?', 'A complaint which I could scarcely show the justice of more emphatically, than by having to repeat it, I might as well have stated it to the wall. I had far better have stated it to the bird. He would at least have screamed.', 'You don', 'Indeed I don  retorted Mrs Merdle, ', 'A man might scream, and yet not be that, Mrs Merdle,', 'And might be dogged, as you are at present, without screaming, That', 'Why, in the name of all the infernal powers, Mrs Merdle, who does more for Society than I do? Do you see these premises, Mrs Merdle? Do you see this furniture, Mrs Merdle? Do you look in the glass and see yourself, Mrs Merdle? Do you know the cost of all this, and who it t to go into Society? I, who shower money upon it in this way? I, who might always be said--to--to--to harness myself to a watering-cart full of money, and go about saturating Society every day of my life.', 'Pray, don', 'Violent? You are enough to make me desperate. You don t know anything of the sacrifices I make for it.', 'I know, that you receive the best in the land. I know that you move in the whole Society of the country. And I believe I know (indeed, not to make any ridiculous pretence about it, I know I know) who sustains you in it, Mr Merdle.', 'Mrs Merdle, I know that as well as you do. If you were not an ornament to Society, and if I was not a benefactor to Society, you and I would never have come together. When I say a benefactor to it, I mean a person who provides it with all sorts of expensive things to eat and drink and look at. But, to tell me that I am not fit for it after all I have done for it--after all I have done for it, after all--all!--to tell me I have no right to mix with it after all, is a pretty reward.', 'I say, that you ought to make yourself fit for it by being more degage, and less preoccupied. There is a positive vulgarity in carrying your business affairs about with you as you do.', 'How do I carry them about, Mrs Merdle?', 'How do you carry them about? Look at yourself in the glass.', 'You have a physician,', 'He does me no good,', 'Besides, your digestion is nonsense. I don', 'Mrs Merdle, I look to you for that. You supply manner, and I supply money.', 'I don  said Mrs Merdle, reposing easily among her cushions,  t want you to take any trouble upon yourself, or to try to be fascinating. I simply request you to care about nothing--or seem to care about nothing--as everybody else does.', 'Do I ever say I care about anything?', 'Say? No! Nobody would attend to you if you did. But you show it.', 'Show what? What do I show?', 'I have already told you. You show that you carry your business cares an projects about, instead of leaving them in the City, or wherever else they belong to, Or seeming to. Seeming would be quite enough: I ask no more. Whereas you couldn s calculations and combinations than you habitually show yourself to be, if you were a carpenter.', 'A carpenter! I shouldn', 'I shouldn', 'And my complaint is, that it is not the tone of Society, and that you ought to correct it, Mr Merdle. If you have any doubt of my judgment, ask even Edmund Sparkler. Edmund; we want you here.', 'that it is not the tone of Society, and that you ought to correct it, Mr Merdle. If you have any doubt of my judgment, ask even Edmund Sparkler. Edmund; we want you here.', 'Edmund Sparkler has heard it noticed, Why, no doubt everybody has heard it noticed!', 'And Edmund Sparkler will tell you, I dare say, how he has heard it noticed.', 'I couldn  said Mr Sparkler, after feeling his pulse as before,  t undertake to say what led to it--', 'couldn cause memory desperate loose. But being in company with the brother of a doosed fine gal--well educated too--with no biggodd nonsense about her--at the period alluded to--', 'There! Never mind the sister, What did the brother say?', 'Didn am, As silent a feller as myself. Equally hard up for a remark.', 'Somebody said something, Never mind who it was.', 'But tell us what it was.', 'Fellers referring to my Governor--expression not my own--occasionally compliment my Governor in a very handsome way on being immensely rich and knowing--perfect phenomenon of Buyer and Banker and that--but say the Shop sits heavily on him. Say he carried the Shop about, on his back rather--like Jew clothesmen with too much business.', 'Which, is exactly my complaint. Edmund, give me your arm up-stairs.', 'is exactly my complaint. Edmund, give me your arm up-stairs.', 'For, as my business with this set of gentlemen was to do a public duty and a public service, and as their business with me was to prevent it by wearing my soul out, I think we had better not eat and drink together with a show of being of one mind. s oddity; and patronised him with a more protecting air of allowance than usual, when he rejoined: ', 'You see, Clennam, I am a disappointed man. That you know already.', 'Upon my word, I scarcely know how.', 'Why, I belong to a clan, or a clique, or a family, or a connection, or whatever you like to call it, that might have provided for me in any one of fifty ways, and that took it into its head not to do it at all. So here I am, a poor devil of an artist.', 'Yes, yes, I know. I have the good fortune of being beloved by a beautiful and charming girl whom I love with all my heart.', 'And of finding a father-in-law who is a capital fellow and a liberal good old boy. Still, I had other prospects washed and combed into my childish head when it was washed and combed for me, and I took them to a public school when I washed and combed it for myself, and I am here without them, and thus I am a disappointed man.', 'Not bitterly disappointed, I think,', 'Hang it, no; not bitterly, My people are not worth that--though they are charming fellows, and I have the greatest affection for them. Besides, it s a dear good world, and I love it!', 'It lies fair before you now,', 'Fair as this summer river, and by Jove I glow with admiration of it, and with ardour to run a race in it. It t it?', 'Full of interest and ambition, I conceive,', 'And imposition, we won', 'To do what?', 'To keep it up. To help myself in my turn, as the man before me helps himself in his, and pass the bottle of smoke. To keep up the pretence as to labour, and study, and patience, and being devoted to my art, and giving up many solitary days to it, and abandoning many pleasures for it, and living in it, and all the rest of it--in short, to pass the bottle of smoke according to rule.', 'But it is well for a man to respect his own vocation, whatever it is; and to think himself bound to uphold it, and to claim for it the respect it deserves; is it not? And your vocation, Gowan, may really demand this suit and service. I confess I should have thought that all Art did.', 'What a good fellow you are, Clennam! What a capital fellow! _You_ have never been disappointed. That', 'Clennam, I don t want to sell it for the most we can get for it, we shouldn s easily enough done. All the rest is hocus-pocus. Now here', 'It  he said, ', 'The past?', 'Yes--but I mean the company.', 'So if the whole thing had broken down, sir, at the very last, say the day before the other day when I showed you our papers in the Prison yard, or say that very day, nobody but ourselves would have been cruelly disappointed, or a penny the worse.', 'Pretty well, sir, No trifle, though we did it as cheap as it could be done. And the outlay was a difficulty, let me tell you.', 'A difficulty! But the difficulties you have so wonderfully conquered in the whole business!', 'I  said the delighted Pancks, putting his hair into a condition as elevated as himself.  t much.', 'I am sorry for it, not that it matters now, though. Then, what did you do?', 'Then, I borrowed a sum of my proprietor.', 'Of Mr Casby? He', 'Noble old boy; an  said Mr Pancks, entering on a series of the dryest snorts. ', 'I said to that boiling-over old Christian, that I had got a little project on hand; a hopeful one; I told him a hopeful one; which wanted a certain small capital. I proposed to him to lend me the money on my note. Which he did, at twenty; sticking the twenty on in a business-like way, and putting it into the note, to look like a part of the principal. If I had broken down after that, I should have been his grubber for the next seven years at half wages and double grind. But he', 'When that was gone, sir, and it did go, though I dribbled it out like so much blood, I had taken Mr Rugg into the secret. I proposed to borrow of Mr Rugg (or of Miss Rugg; it s a red-haired man, sir, and gets his hair cut. And as to the crown of his hat, it s narrow. And there', 'Your own recompense for all this, Mr Pancks, ought to be a large one.', 'I don  said Pancks.  s bill settled, a thousand pounds would be a fortune to me. That matter I place in your hands. I authorize you now to break all this to the family in any way you think best. Miss Amy Dorrit will be with Mrs Finching this morning. The sooner done the better. Can', 'Good gracious, Arthur--Doyce and Clennam! who would have ever thought of seeing such a sight as this and pray excuse a wrapper for upon my word I really never and a faded check too which is worse but our little friend is making me, not that I need mind mentioning it to you for you must know that there are such things a skirt, and having arranged that a trying on should take place after breakfast is the reason though I wish not so badly starched.', 'I ought to make an apology, for so early and abrupt a visit; but you will excuse it when I tell you the cause.', 'In times for ever fled Arthur, pray excuse me Doyce and Clennam infinitely more correct and though unquestionably distant still  t mean that and if I did I suppose it would depend considerably on the nature of the view, but I', 'In times for ever fled I was going to say it would have sounded strange indeed for Arthur Clennam--Doyce and Clennam naturally quite different--to make apologies for coming here at any time, but that is past and what is past can never be recalled except in his own case as poor Mr F. said when he was in spirits Cucumber and therefore never ate it.', 'Papa, is sitting prosingly breaking his new laid egg in the back parlour over the City article exactly like the Woodpecker Tapping and need never know that you are here, and our little friend you are well aware may be fully trusted when she comes down from cutting out on the large table overhead.', 'For gracious sake let me get out of the way first, or I know I shall go off dead and screaming and make everybody worse, and the dear little thing only this morning looking so nice and neat and good and yet so poor and now a fortune is she really and deserves it too! and might I mention it to Mr F.', 'Nothing, nothing. That is, no misfortune has happened. I have come to tell you something, but it is a piece of great good-fortune.', 'Good-fortune?', 'Wonderful fortune!', 'Wonderful fortune?', 'Dear Little Dorrit! Your father.', 'Your father can be free within this week. He does not know it; we must go to him from here, to tell him of it. Your father will be free within a few days. Your father will be free within a few hours. Remember we must go to him from here, to tell him of it!', 'This is not all the good-fortune. This is not all the wonderful good-fortune, my dear Little Dorrit. Shall I tell you more?', 'Your father will be no beggar when he is free. He will want for nothing. Shall I tell you more? Remember! He knows nothing of it; we must go to him, from here, to tell him of it!', 'Did you ask me to go on?', 'Yes.', 'He will be a rich man. He is a rich man. A great sum of money is waiting to be paid over to him as his inheritance; you are all henceforth very wealthy. Bravest and best of children, I thank Heaven that you are rewarded!', 'I declare, I never was so cut up since your mama and my papa not Doyce and Clennam for this once but give the precious little thing a cup of tea and make her put it to her lips at least pray Arthur do, not even Mr F. s affection though very painful for all parties and Mr F. a martyr with his leg upon a rest and the wine trade in itself inflammatory for they will do it more or less among themselves and who can wonder, it seems like a dream I am sure to think of nothing at all this morning and now Mines of money is it really, but you must know my darling love because you never will be strong enough to tell him all about it upon teaspoons, mightn d rather not why no my dear I', 'Father! I have been made so happy this morning!', 'You have been made so happy, my dear?', 'By Mr Clennam, father. He brought me such joyful and wonderful intelligence about you! If he had not with his great kindness and gentleness, prepared me for it, father--prepared me for it, father--I think I could not have borne it.', 'Compose yourself, sir, and take a little time to think. To think of the brightest and most fortunate accidents of life. We have all heard of great surprises of joy. They are not at an end, sir. They are rare, but not at an end.', 'Mr Clennam? Not at an end? Not at an end for-- me.', 'No,', 'What surprise, what such surprise can be in store for me?', 'Let me answer with another question. Tell me, Mr Dorrit, what surprise would be the most unlooked for and the most acceptable to you. Do not be afraid to imagine it, or to say what it would be.', 'It is down, Gone!', 'And in its place, are the means to possess and enjoy the utmost that they have so long shut out. Mr Dorrit, there is not the smallest doubt that within a few days you will be free, and highly prosperous. I congratulate you with all my soul on this change of fortune, and on the happy future into which you are soon to carry the treasure you have been blest with here--the best of all the riches you can have elsewhere--the treasure at your side.', 'I shall see him as I never saw him yet. I shall see my dear love, with the dark cloud cleared away. I shall see him, as my poor mother saw him long ago. O my dear, my dear! O father, father! O thank God, thank God!', 'He shall be--ha--he shall be handsomely recompensed, sir, Assure yourself, Mr Clennam, that everybody concerned shall be--ha--shall be nobly rewarded. No one, my dear sir, shall say that he has an unsatisfied claim against me. I shall repay the--hum--the advances I have had from you, sir, with peculiar pleasure. I beg to be informed at your earliest convenience, what advances you have made my son.', 'Everybody, shall be remembered. I will not go away from here in anybody', 'Will you allow me, to supply any present contingencies, Mr Dorrit? I thought it best to bring a sum of money for the purpose.', 'Thank you, sir, thank you. I accept with readiness, at the present moment, what I could not an hour ago have conscientiously taken. I am obliged to you for the temporary accommodation. Exceedingly temporary, but well timed--well timed. Be so kind, sir, as to add the amount to those former advances to which I have already referred; being careful, if you please, not to omit advances made to my son. A mere verbal statement of the gross amount is all I shall--ha--all I shall require.', 'It will be necessary to find a milliner, my love, and to make a speedy and complete change in your very plain dress. Something must be done with Maggy too, who at present is--ha--barely respectable, barely respectable. And your sister, Amy, and your brother. And _my_ brother, your uncle--poor soul, I trust this will rouse him--messengers must be despatched to fetch them. They must be informed of this. We must break it to them cautiously, but they must be informed directly. We owe it as a duty to them and to ourselves, from this moment, not to let them--hum--not to let them do anything.', 'I--hum--ha--I confess I could have desired, Amy my dear, to have made some change in my dress first, and to have bought a--hum--a watch and chain. But if it must be done as it is, it--ha--it must be done. Fasten the collar of my shirt, my dear. Mr Clennam, would you oblige me--hum--with a blue neckcloth you will find in that drawer at your elbow. Button my coat across at the chest, my love. It looks--ha--it looks broader, buttoned.', 'Mr Clennam, I beg your pardon. Am I to understand, my dear sir, that I could--ha--could pass through the Lodge at this moment, and--hum--take a walk?', 'I think not, Mr Dorrit, There are certain forms to be completed; and although your detention here is now in itself a form, I fear it is one that for a little longer has to be observed too.', 'It is but a few hours, sir,', 'A few hours, sir, You talk very easily of hours, sir! How long do you suppose, sir, that an hour is to a man who is choking for want of air?', 'Mr Clennam, will he pay all his debts before he leaves here?', 'No doubt. All.', 'All the debts for which he had been imprisoned here, all my life and longer?', 'No doubt.', 'You are glad that he should do so?', 'Are you?', 'Am I? Most heartily glad!', 'Then I know I ought to be.', 'And are you not?', 'It seems to me hard, that he should have lost so many years and suffered so much, and at last pay all the debts as well. It seems to me hard that he should pay in life and money both.', 'My dear child--', 'Yes, I know I am wrong, don', 'My dear Frederick, if you will give me your arm we will pass among our friends together. I think it is right that we should go out arm in arm, my dear Frederick.', 'Hah! Yes, yes, yes, yes.', 'And if, my dear Frederick--if you could, without putting any great constraint upon yourself, throw a little (pray excuse me, Frederick), a little polish into your usual demeanour--', 'William, William, it t know how. All forgotten, forgotten!', 'But, my dear fellow, for that very reason, if for no other, you must positively try to rouse yourself. What you have forgotten you must now begin to recall, my dear Frederick. Your position--', 'Eh?', 'Your position, my dear Frederick.', 'Mine? s, and then, drawing a long breath, cried, ', 'Your position, my dear Frederick, is now a fine one. Your position, as my brother, is a very fine one. And I know that it belongs to your conscientious nature to try to become worthy of it, my dear Frederick, and to try to adorn it. To be no discredit to it, but to adorn it.', 'William, I will do anything you wish, my brother, provided it lies in my power. Pray be so kind as to recollect what a limited power mine is. What would you wish me to do to-day, brother? Say what it is, only say what it is.', 'My dearest Frederick, nothing. It is not worth troubling so good a heart as yours with.', 'Pray trouble it, It finds it no trouble, William, to do anything it can for you.', 'What would you advise me to think about it?', 'Oh! my dear Frederick, how can I answer you? I can only say what, in leaving these good people, I think myself.', 'That  cried his brother. ', 'I find that I think, my dear Frederick, and with mixed emotions in which a softened compassion predominates, What will they do without me!', 'True, Yes, yes, yes, yes. I', 'Where', 'Now I do say, Pa, that this is disgraceful!', 'What is disgraceful, Fanny?', 'I do say, this is perfectly infamous! Really almost enough, even at such a time as this, to make one wish one was dead! Here is that child Amy, in her ugly old shabby dress, which she was so obstinate about, Pa, which I over and over again begged and prayed her to change, and which she over and over again objected to, and promised to change to-day, saying she wished to wear it as long as ever she remained in there with you--which was absolutely romantic nonsense of the lowest kind--here is that child Amy disgracing us to the last moment and at the last moment, by being carried out in that dress after all. And by that Mr Clennam too!', 'She has been forgotten, I ran up to her room (which Mr Chivery showed me) and found the door open, and that she had fainted on the floor, dear child. She appeared to have gone to change her dress, and to have sunk down overpowered. It may have been the cheering, or it may have happened sooner. Take care of this poor cold hand, Miss Dorrit. Don', 'Thank you, sir, I believe I know what to do, if you will give me leave. Dear Amy, open your eyes, that', 'My daughter, I am obliged to you, sir, is quite restored, and has been greatly interested.', 'New to mountains, perhaps?', 'New to--ha--to mountains,', 'But you are familiar with them, sir?', 'I am--hum--tolerably familiar. Not of late years. Not of late years,', 'Incommoded, certainly, but not tired.', 'We have had, of course, to leave the carriages and fourgon at Martigny. And the impossibility of bringing anything that one wants to this inaccessible place, and the necessity of leaving every comfort behind, is not convenient.', 'A savage place indeed,', 'But, like other inconvenient places, it must be seen. As a place much spoken of, it is necessary to see it.', 'O! I have not the least objection to seeing it, I assure you, Mrs General,', 'You, madam, have visited this spot before?', 'Yes, I have been here before. Let me commend you, my dear, to shade your face from the hot wood, after exposure to the mountain air and snow. You, too, my dear, Thank you, Mrs General, I am Perfectly comfortable, and prefer remaining as I am.', 'These fellows are an immense time with supper, I wonder what they', 'Not roast man, I believe,', 'I suppose not. What d', 'That, as you are not to be served for the general supper, perhaps you will do us the favour of not cooking yourself at the general fire,', 'I think, I had best carry her straight to her room. Will you call to some one to bring a light? and to show the way? In this strange rambling place I don', 'Pray, let me call my maid,', 'Pray, let me put this water to her lips,', 'Your friend, sir, is--ha--is a little impatient; and, in his impatience, is not perhaps fully sensible of what he owes to--hum--to--but we will waive that, we will waive that. Your friend is a little impatient, sir.', 'It may be so, sir, But having had the honour of making that gentleman', 'You are in no danger, sir, of hearing any such thing from me. In remarking that your friend has shown impatience, I say no such thing. I make that remark, because it is not to be doubted that my son, being by birth and by--ha--by education a--hum--a gentleman, would have readily adapted himself to any obligingly expressed wish on the subject of the fire being equally accessible to the whole of the present circle. Which, in principle, I--ha--for all are--hum--equal on these occasions--I consider right.', 'Good, And there it ends! I am your son', 'The lady is your friend', 'The lady is my friend', 'She is very handsome.', 'Sir, she is peerless. They are still in the first year of their marriage. They are still partly on a marriage, and partly on an artistic, tour.', 'Your friend is an artist, sir?', 'But he is a man of family, His connections are of the best. He is more than an artist: he is highly connected. He may, in effect, have repudiated his connections, proudly, impatiently, sarcastically (I make the concession of both words); but he has them. Sparks that have been struck out during our intercourse have shown me this.', 'Well! I hope, that the lady', 'Sir, I hope so.', 'Mere fatigue, I dare say.', 'Not altogether mere fatigue, sir, for her mule stumbled to-day, and she fell from the saddle. She fell lightly, and was up again without assistance, and rode from us laughing; but she complained towards evening of a slight bruise in the side. She spoke of it more than once, as we followed your party up the mountain.', 'Pray, has your convent many of its famous dogs now?', 'Monsieur, it has three.', 'I saw three in the gallery below. Doubtless the three in question.', 'And I think, I have seen one of them before.', 'Which is done in its regular season of the year, I think?', 'And never without a dog. The dog is very important.', 'Ask him if he has saved many lives?', 'Why not?', 'Pardon, give him the opportunity and he will do it without doubt. For example, I am well convinced, that if you, Monsieur, would give him the opportunity, he would hasten with great ardour to fulfil his duty.', 'It is becoming late in the year, my Father, for tourist-travellers, is it not?', 'Yes, it is late. Yet two or three weeks, at most, and we shall be left to the winter snows.', 'And then, for the scratching dogs and the buried children, according to the pictures!', 'Pardon, How, then the scratching dogs and the buried children according to the pictures?', 'Don  he coldly inquired across the table of his companion, ', 'that none but smugglers come this way in the winter or can have any possible business this way?', 'Holy blue! No; never heard of it.', 'So it is, I believe. And as they know the signs of the weather tolerably well, they don s a grand idea! It s the finest idea in the world, and brings tears into a man', 'Look, at this gentleman our host, not yet in the prime of life, who in so graceful a way and with such courtly urbanity and modesty presides over us! Manners fit for a crown! Dine with the Lord Mayor of London (if you can get an invitation) and observe the contrast. This dear fellow, with the finest cut face I ever saw, a face in perfect drawing, leaves some laborious life and comes up here I don t it a beautiful sacrifice? What do we want more to touch us? Because rescued people of interesting appearance are not, for eight or nine months out of every twelve, holding on here round the necks of the most sagacious of dogs carrying wooden bottles, shall we disparage the place? No! Bless the place. It', 'But the space, So small. So--ha--very limited.', 'I--ha--yes, very true,', 'Perfectly, perfectly. Without doubt,', 'It is true, We will--ha--not pursue the subject. You are--hum--quite accurate, I have no doubt. We will say no more.', 'She is very pretty, I never saw so beautiful a face. O how unlike me!', 'I know I must be right. I know he spoke of her that evening. I could very easily be wrong on any other subject, but not on this, not on this!', 'I like to look at her, I like to see what has affected him so much.', 'Pray don', 'I think you have already been so kind as to send your servants to my assistance?', 'No, not I; that was my sister. Are you better?', 'Much better. It is only a slight bruise, and has been well looked to, and is almost easy now. It made me giddy and faint in a moment. It had hurt me before; but at last it overpowered me all at once.', 'May I stay with you until some one comes? Would you like it?', 'I should like it, for it is lonely here; but I am afraid you will feel the cold too much.', 'I don', 'You have so much the air of a kind nurse, that you seem as if you had come to me from home.', 'I am very glad of it.', 'I was dreaming of home when I woke just now. Of my old home, I mean, before I was married.', 'And before you were so far away from it.', 'I have been much farther away from it than this; but then I took the best part of it with me, and missed nothing. I felt solitary as I dropped asleep here, and, missing it a little, wandered back to it.', 'It is a curious chance which at last brings us together, under this covering in which you have wrapped me, for do you know, I think I have been looking for you some time.', 'Looking for me?', 'I believe I have a little note here, which I was to give to you whenever I found you. This is it. Unless I greatly mistake, it is addressed to you? Is it not?', 'The dear young friend to whom he presents me, may be a comfort to me at some time, he says. She is truly a comfort to me the first time I see her.', 'Perhaps you don  said the visitor, hesitating-- t know my story? Perhaps he never told you my story?', 'No.', 'Oh no, why should he! I have scarcely the right to tell it myself at present, because I have been entreated not to do so. There is not much in it, but it might account to you for my asking you not to say anything about the letter here. You saw my family with me, perhaps? Some of them--I only say this to you--are a little proud, a little prejudiced.', 'You shall take it back again, and then my husband is sure not to see it. He might see it and speak of it, otherwise, by some accident. Will you put it in your bosom again, to be certain?', 'I promised, that I would write to him after seeing you (I could hardly fail to see you sooner or later), and tell him if you were well and happy. I had better say you were well and happy.', 'Yes, yes, yes! Say I was very well and very happy. And that I thanked him affectionately, and would never forget him.', 'I shall see you in the morning. After that we are sure to meet again before very long. Good night!', 'Good night. Thank you, thank you. Good night, my dear!', 'May I ask, sir, if you are on your way to Italy?', 'I also! I shall hope to have the honour of offering my compliments in fairer scenes, and under softer circumstances, than on this dismal mountain.', 'We poor gentlemen, sir, we poor gentlemen do not travel like princes, but the courtesies and graces of life are precious to us. To your health, sir!', 'Sir, I thank you.', 'To the health of your distinguished family--of the fair ladies, your daughters!', 'Sir, I thank you again, I wish you good night. My dear, are our--ha--our people in attendance?', 'They are close by, father.', 'Permit me! s. ', 'Humph! If they all go to bed, why I must go. They are in a devil of a hurry. One would think the night would be long enough, in this freezing silence and solitude, if one went to bed two hours hence.', 'form the mind, s communication of this idea to her clerical and commissariat connection was so warmly applauded that, but for the lady', 'Might I be excused, if I inquired--ha--what remune--', 'Why, indeed, it is a subject on which I prefer to avoid entering. I have never entered on it with my friends here; and I cannot overcome the delicacy, Mr Dorrit, with which I have always regarded it. I am not, as I hope you are aware, a governess--', 'O dear no! Pray, madam, do not imagine for a moment that I think so.', 'I cannot object, though even that is disagreeable to me--to Mr Dorrit .', 'Permit me to add, that beyond this, I can never resume the topic. Also that I can accept no second or inferior position. If the honour were proposed to me of becoming known to Mr Dorrit', 'Two daughters.', 'I could only accept it on terms of perfect equality, as a companion, protector, Mentor, and friend.', 'I think, two daughters were mentioned?', 'Two daughters,', 'It would therefore, be necessary to add a third more to the payment (whatever its amount may prove to be), which my friends here have been accustomed to make to my bankers', 'Gowan, eh? Then Gowan is the name of a puppy, that d pull his nose. But it isn s his wife, Amy? I suppose you know. You generally know things of that sort.', 'She is better, Edward. But they are not going to-day.', 'Oh! They are not going to-day! Fortunately for that fellow too, or he and I might have come into collision.', 'It is thought better here that she should lie quiet to-day, and not be fatigued and shaken by the ride down until to-morrow.', 'With all my heart. But you talk as if you had been nursing her. You haven', 'I have only been in to ask her if I could do anything for her, Tip,', 'You needn  returned that young gentleman with a frown;  s an old habit, and one you may as well lay aside.', 'I didn', 'Oh yes! Natural, and right word, and once, and all the rest of it! Nonsense, you little thing! I know perfectly well why you have been taking such an interest in this Mrs Gowan. You can', 'I will not try to, Fanny. Don', 'Oh! angry! I have no patience', 'Pray, Fanny, what do you mean? Explain yourself.', 'Oh! Never mind, Pa, it', 'My child, has your sister--any--ha--authority for this curious statement?', 'However meek we are, we don s rooms on the tops of cold mountains, and sitting perishing in the frost with people, unless we know something about them beforehand. It', 'Whose friend?', 'Pa, I am sorry to say, that I believe her to be a friend of that very objectionable and unpleasant person, who, with a total absence of all delicacy, which our experience might have led us to expect from him, insulted us and outraged our feelings in so public and wilful a manner on an occasion to which it is understood among us that we will not more pointedly allude.', 'Amy, my child, is this the case?', 'Yes it is! Of course! I said so! And now, Pa, I do declare once for all that this is shameful! I do declare once for all that it ought to be put a stop to. Is it not enough that we have gone through what is only known to ourselves, but are we to have it thrown in our faces, perseveringly and systematically, by the very person who should spare our feelings most? Are we to be exposed to this unnatural conduct every moment of our lives? Are we never to be permitted to forget? I say again, it is absolutely infamous!', 'Well, Amy, you know I stand by you whenever I can, and on most occasions. But I must say, that, upon my soul, I do consider it rather an unaccountable mode of showing your sisterly affection, that you should back up a man who treated me in the most ungentlemanly way in which one man can treat another. And who, must be a low-minded thief, you know, or he never could have conducted himself as he did.', 'And see, see what is involved in this! Can we ever hope to be respected by our servants? Never. Here are our two women, and Pa  said Miss Fanny, ', 'I don  remarked Mr Edward; ', 'He is part of the same thing, and of a piece with all the rest. He obtruded himself upon us in the first instance. We never wanted him. I always showed him, for one, that I could have dispensed with his company with the greatest pleasure. He then commits that gross outrage upon our feelings, which he never could or would have committed but for the delight he took in exposing us; and then we are to be demeaned for the service of his friends! Why, I don s conduct towards you. What else was to be expected when he was enjoying our past misfortunes--gloating over them at the moment!', 'Father--Edward--no indeed! Neither Mr nor Mrs Gowan had ever heard our name. They were, and they are, quite ignorant of our history.', 'So much the worse, for then you have no excuse. If they had known about us, you might have felt yourself called upon to conciliate them. That would have been a weak and ridiculous mistake, but I can respect a mistake, whereas I can t respect that. I can do nothing but denounce that.', 'I never offend you wilfully, Fanny, though you are so hard with me.', 'Then you should be more careful, Amy, If you do such things by accident, you should be more careful. If I happened to have been born in a peculiar place, and under peculiar circumstances that blunted my knowledge of propriety, I fancy I should think myself bound to consider at every step, "Am I going, ignorantly, to compromise any near and dear relations?" That is what I fancy _I_ should do, if it was _my_ case.', 'My dear, I beg you to--ha--to say no more. Your sister Fanny expresses herself strongly, but not without considerable reason. You have now a--hum--a great position to support. That great position is not occupied by yourself alone, but by--ha--by me, and--ha hum--by us. Us. Now, it is incumbent upon all people in an exalted position, but it is particularly so on this family, for reasons which I--ha--will not dwell upon, to make themselves respected. To be vigilant in making themselves respected. Dependants, to respect us, must be--ha--kept at a distance and--hum--kept down. Down. Therefore, your not exposing yourself to the remarks of our attendants by appearing to have at any time dispensed with their services and performed them for yourself, is--ha--highly important.', 'Why, who can doubt it? It', 'Fanny, give me leave, my dear. We then come to--ha--to Mr Clennam. I am free to say that I do not, Amy, share your sister  here Mr Dorrit became extremely grave and impressive, ', 'Is it possible, sir, that you have--ha--had the audacity to place one of my rooms at the disposition of any other person?', 'No, sir, I will not occupy any salon. I will leave your house without eating or drinking, or setting foot in it. How do you dare to act like this? Who am I that you--ha--separate me from other gentlemen?', 'Don  returned Mr Dorrit, in a mighty heat. ', 'I tell you, sir, that you separate me--ha--from other gentlemen; that you make distinctions between me and other gentlemen of fortune and station. I demand of you, why? I wish to know on--ha--what authority, on whose authority. Reply sir. Explain. Answer why.', 'Silence! Hold your tongue! I will hear no more of the very genteel lady; I will hear no more of you. Look at this family--my family--a family more genteel than any lady. You have treated this family with disrespect; you have been insolent to this family. I ll not set foot in this man', 'Beg your pardon, I am a man of few words and a bad hand at an explanation--but lady here is extremely anxious that there should be no Row. Lady--a mother of mine, in point of fact--wishes me to say that she hopes no Row.', 'No, but really--here, old feller; you! s way of appealing to Edward Dorrit, Esquire, on whom he pounced as a great and providential relief. ', 'No, I know it isn s at all, but my mother', 'If that', 'Assure you  tis the case. Consequently, why Row?', 'Edmund, I hope you have explained, or are explaining, to the satisfaction of this gentleman and his family that the civil landlord is not to blame?', 'Assure you, ma  returned Edmund,   He then looked steadfastly at Edward Dorrit, Esquire, for some seconds, and suddenly added, in a burst of confidence, ', 'I don  said the lady, gracefully advancing a step or two towards Mr Dorrit,  s suite of rooms during his absence, for just as much (or as little) time as I could dine in. I had no idea the rightful owner would come back so soon, nor had I any idea that he had come back, or I should have hastened to make restoration of my ill-gotten chamber, and to have offered my explanation and apology. I trust in saying this--', 'Mrs General, I took the liberty--', 'By no means, I was quite at your disposition. I had had my coffee.', '--I took the liberty, to solicit the favour of a little private conversation with you, because I feel rather worried respecting my--ha--my younger daughter. You will have observed a great difference of temperament, madam, between my two daughters?', 'May I ask to be favoured with your view of it?', 'Fanny, has force of character and self-reliance. Amy, none.', 'I would not, be understood to say, observe, that there is nothing to improve in Fanny. But there is material there--perhaps, indeed, a little too much.', 'Will you be kind enough, madam, to be--ha--more explicit? I do not quite understand my elder daughter', 'Fanny, at present forms too many opinions. Perfect breeding forms none, and is never demonstrative.', 'But you are aware, my dear madam, that my daughters had the misfortune to lose their lamented mother when they were very young; and that, in consequence of my not having been until lately the recognised heir to my property, they have lived with me as a comparatively poor, though always proud, gentleman, in--ha hum--retirement!', 'I do not, lose sight of the circumstance.', 'Madam, of my daughter Fanny, under her present guidance and with such an example constantly before her--', 'There is no accounting, for these partialities.', 'Ha--no, No. Now, madam, I am troubled by noticing that Amy is not, so to speak, one of ourselves. She does not care to go about with us; she is lost in the society we have here; our tastes are evidently not her tastes. Which, is to say, in other words, that there is something wrong in--ha--Amy.', 'May we incline to the supposition, that something is referable to the novelty of the position?', 'Excuse me, madam, The daughter of a gentleman, though--ha--himself at one time comparatively far from affluent--comparatively--and herself reared in--hum--retirement, need not of necessity find this position so very novel.', 'True, true.', 'Therefore, madam, I took the liberty I took the liberty of requesting this interview, in order that I might mention the topic to you, and inquire how you would advise me?', 'Mr Dorrit, I have conversed with Amy several times since we have been residing here, on the general subject of the formation of a demeanour. She has expressed herself to me as wondering exceedingly at Venice. I have mentioned to her that it is better not to wonder. I have pointed out to her that the celebrated Mr Eustace, the classical tourist, did not think much of it; and that he compared the Rialto, greatly to its disadvantage, with Westminster and Blackfriars Bridges. I need not add, after what you have said, that I have not yet found my arguments successful. You do me the honour to ask me what to advise. It always appears to me (if this should prove to be a baseless assumption, I shall be pardoned), that Mr Dorrit has been accustomed to exercise influence over the minds of others.', 'Hum--madam, I have been at the head of--ha of a considerable community. You are right in supposing that I am not unaccustomed to--an influential position.', 'I am happy, to be so corroborated. I would therefore the more confidently recommend that Mr Dorrit should speak to Amy himself, and make his observations and wishes known to her. Being his favourite, besides, and no doubt attached to him, she is all the more likely to yield to his influence.', 'I had anticipated your suggestion, madam, but--ha--was not sure that I might--hum--not encroach on--', 'but--ha--was not sure that I might--hum--not encroach on--', 'On my province, Mr Dorrit? Do not mention it.', 'Then, with your leave, madam, I will send for her at once.', 'Does Mr Dorrit wish me to remain?', 'Perhaps, if you have no other engagement, you would not object for a minute or two--', 'Not at all.', 'Amy, you have just now been the subject of some conversation between myself and Mrs General. We agree that you scarcely seem at home here. Ha--how is this?', 'I think, father, I require a little time.', 'Papa is a preferable mode of address, Father is rather vulgar, my dear. The word Papa, besides, gives a pretty form to the lips. Papa, potatoes, poultry, prunes, and prism are all very good words for the lips: especially prunes and prism. You will find it serviceable, in the formation of a demeanour, if you sometimes say to yourself in company--on entering a room, for instance--Papa, potatoes, poultry, prunes and prism, prunes and prism.', 'Pray, my child, attend to the--hum--precepts of Mrs General.', 'You say, Amy, that you think you require time. Time for what?', 'To become accustomed to the novelty of my life, was all I meant,', 'it appears to me, I must say, that you have had abundance of time for that. Ha--you surprise me. You disappoint me. Fanny has conquered any such little difficulties, and--hum--why not you?', 'I hope I shall do better soon,', 'I hope so, I--ha--I most devoutly hope so, Amy. I sent for you, in order that I might say--hum--impressively say, in the presence of Mrs General, to whom we are all so much indebted for obligingly being present among us, on--ha--on this or any other occasion, that I--ha hum--am not pleased with you. You make Mrs General', 'I do beg, that this may be attended to, and that you will seriously take pains and try to conduct yourself in a manner both becoming your position as--ha--Miss Amy Dorrit, and satisfactory to myself and Mrs General.', 'If Miss Amy Dorrit will direct her own attention to, and will accept of my poor assistance in, the formation of a surface, Mr. Dorrit will have no further cause of anxiety. May I take this opportunity of remarking, as an instance in point, that it is scarcely delicate to look at vagrants with the attention which I have seen bestowed upon them by a very dear young friend of mine? They should not be looked at. Nothing disagreeable should ever be looked at. Apart from such a habit standing in the way of that graceful equanimity of surface which is so expressive of good breeding, it hardly seems compatible with refinement of mind. A truly refined mind will seem to be ignorant of the existence of anything that is not perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.', 'Is there anything else you wish to say to me, dear father?', 'No, no. Nothing else.', 'I am sorry you have not been pleased with me, dear. I hope you will not think of me with displeasure now. I am going to try, more than ever, to adapt myself as you wish to what surrounds me--for indeed I have tried all along, though I have failed, I know.', 'Amy, You--ha--habitually hurt me.', 'Hurt you, father! I!', 'There is a--hum--a topic, a painful topic, a series of events which I wish--ha--altogether to obliterate. This is understood by your sister, who has already remonstrated with you in my presence; it is understood by your brother; it is understood by--ha hum--by every one of delicacy and sensitiveness except yourself--ha--I am sorry to say, except yourself. You, Amy--hum--you alone and only you--constantly revive the topic, though not in words.', 'I was there all those years. I was--ha--universally acknowledged as the head of the place. I--hum--I caused you to be respected there, Amy. I--ha hum--I gave my family a position there. I deserve a return. I claim a return. I say, sweep it off the face of the earth and begin afresh. Is that much? I ask, is _that_ much?', 'I have suffered. Probably I know how much I have suffered better than any one--ha--I say than any one! If _I_ can put that aside, if _I_ can eradicate the marks of what I have endured, and can emerge before the world--a--ha--gentleman unspoiled, unspotted--is it a great deal to expect--I say again, is it a great deal to expect--that my children should--hum--do the same and sweep that accursed experience off the face of the earth?', 'Accordingly, they do it. Your sister does it. Your brother does it. You alone, my favourite child, whom I made the friend and companion of my life when you were a mere--hum--Baby, do not do it. You alone say you can', 'I am careful to appeal to that lady for confirmation, before I express any displeasure at all. I--hum--I necessarily make that appeal within limited bounds, or I--ha--should render legible, by that lady, what I desire to be blotted out. Am I selfish? Do I complain for my own sake? No. No. Principally for--ha hum--your sake, Amy.', 'I said I was hurt. So I am. So I--ha--am determined to be, whatever is advanced to the contrary. I am hurt that my daughter, seated in the--hum--lap of fortune, should mope and retire and proclaim herself unequal to her destiny. I am hurt that she should--ha--systematically reproduce what the rest of us blot out; and seem--hum--I had almost said positively anxious--to announce to wealthy and distinguished society that she was born and bred in--ha hum--a place that I myself decline to name. But there is no inconsistency--ha--not the least, in my feeling hurt, and yet complaining principally for your sake, Amy. I do; I say again, I do. It is for your sake that I wish you, under the auspices of Mrs General, to form a--hum--a surface. It is for your sake that I wish you to have a--ha--truly refined mind, and (in the striking words of Mrs General) to be ignorant of everything that is not perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.', 'going into society;', '_I_ remember ', 'I should think so, But they would not have been recalled to our remembrance, I suspect, if Uncle hadn', 'My dear, what a curious phrase, Would not inadvertently lighted upon, or accidentally referred to, be better?', 'Thank you very much, Mrs General, no, I think not. On the whole I prefer my own expression.', 'I should have mentioned our having met Mr and Mrs Gowan, Fanny, even if Uncle had not. I have scarcely seen you since, you know. I meant to have spoken of it at breakfast; because I should like to pay a visit to Mrs Gowan, and to become better acquainted with her, if Papa and Mrs General do not object.', 'Well, Amy, I am sure I am glad to find you at last expressing a wish to become better acquainted with anybody in Venice. Though whether Mr and Mrs Gowan are desirable acquaintances, remains to be determined.', 'Mrs Gowan I spoke of, dear.', 'No doubt, But you can', 'Do you think, Papa, there is any objection to my making this visit?', 'Really, I--ha--what is Mrs General', 'Perhaps it s, I can', 'That, I would say, Makes the greatest difference. The connection in question, being really people of importance and consideration--', 'As to that, I', 'The great Merdle!', '_The_ Merdle, They are known to him. Mrs Gowan--I mean the dowager, my polite friend', 'If so, a more undeniable guarantee could not be given,', 'I beg to ask my son, from motives of--ah--curiosity, how he becomes possessed of this--hum--timely information?', 'It  returned Edward Dorrit, Esquire,  s-his-name place.', 'Martigny,', 'Martigny,', 'How can that be, Edward? You informed me that the name of the gentleman with whom you conferred was--ha--Sparkler. Indeed, you showed me his card. Hum. Sparkler.', 'No doubt of it, father; but it doesn s name must be the same. Mrs Merdle was married before, and he is her son. She is in Rome now; where probably we shall know more of her, as you decide to winter there. Sparkler is just come here. I passed last evening in company with Sparkler. Sparkler is a very good fellow on the whole, though rather a bore on one subject, in consequence of being tremendously smitten with a certain young lady. We happened last night to compare notes about our travels, and I had the information I have given you from Sparkler himself.', 'Under these circumstances, I believe I express the sentiments of--ha--Mrs General, no less than my own, when I say that there is no objection, but--ha hum--quite the contrary--to your gratifying your desire, Amy. I trust I may--ha--hail--this desire, as an auspicious omen. It is quite right to know these people. It is a very proper thing. Mr Merdle s undertakings are immense. They bring him in such vast sums of money that they are regarded as--hum--national benefits. Mr Merdle is the man of this time. The name of Merdle is the name of the age. Pray do everything on my behalf that is civil to Mr and Mrs Gowan, for we will--ha--we will certainly notice them.', 'Brother! I protest against it! I love you; you know I love you dearly. In these many years I have never been untrue to you in a single thought. Weak as I am, I would at any time have struck any man who spoke ill of you. But, brother, brother, brother, I protest against it!', 'My dear Frederick! What is wrong? What is the matter?', 'How dare you, how dare you do it? Have you no memory? Have you no heart?', 'Uncle? why do you attack me in this cruel manner? What have I done?', 'Done? s place,  s your affectionate invaluable friend? Where s your more than mother? How dare you set up superiorities against all these characters combined in your sister? For shame, you false girl, for shame!', 'I love Amy, as well as I love my life--better than I love my life. I don s possible for any human being to be. I wish I was dead. I never was so wickedly wronged. And only because I am anxious for the family credit.', 'To the winds with the family credit! Brother, I protest against pride. I protest against ingratitude. I protest against any one of us here who have known what we have known, and have seen what we have seen, setting up any pretension that puts Amy at a moment s pain. We may know that it', 'I never, never, never was so used! There never was anything so harsh and unjustifiable, so disgracefully violent and cruel! Dear, kind, quiet little Amy, too, what would she feel if she could know that she had been innocently the means of exposing me to such treatment! But I ll never tell her!', 'My dear, I--ha--approve of your resolution. It will be--ha hum--much better not to speak of this to Amy. It might--hum--it might distress her. Ha. No doubt it would distress her greatly. It is considerate and right to avoid doing so. We will--ha--keep this to ourselves.', 'But the cruelty of Uncle! O, I never can forgive the wanton cruelty of Uncle!', 'My dear, I must request you not to say so. You must remember that your uncle is--ha--not what he formerly was. You must remember that your uncle', 'I am sure, it is only charitable to suppose that there must be something wrong in him somewhere, or he never could have so attacked Me, of all the people in the world.', 'Fanny, you know, with his innumerable good points, what a--hum--wreck your uncle is; and, I entreat you by the fondness that I have for him, and by the fidelity that you know I have always shown him, to--ha--to draw your own conclusions, and to spare my brotherly feelings.', 'Papa was extremely sorry, to be engaged to-day (he is so much engaged here, our acquaintance being so wretchedly large!); and particularly requested me to bring his card for Mr Gowan. That I may be sure to acquit myself of a commission which he impressed upon me at least a dozen times, allow me to relieve my conscience by placing it on the table at once.', 'We have been, charmed to understand that you know the Merdles. We hope it may be another means of bringing us together.', 'They are friends, of Mr Gowan', 'Indeed? I think you', 'You know her very well?', 'Why, you see, in London one knows every one. We met her on our way here, and, to say the truth, papa was at first rather cross with her for taking one of the rooms that our people had ordered for us. However, of course, that soon blew over, and we were all good friends again.', 'in London one knows every one. We met her on our way here, and, to say the truth, papa was at first rather cross with her for taking one of the rooms that our people had ordered for us. However, of course, that soon blew over, and we were all good friends again.', 'You have been quite well, since that night?', 'Quite, my dear. And you?', 'Oh! I am always well, I--yes, thank you.', 'You don s, and that I am almost bound to be jealous of you?', 'He will tell you, if he tells you what he tells me, that you are quieter and quicker of resource than any one he ever saw.', 'He speaks far too well of me,', 'I doubt that; but I don s studio?', 'Don  said Gowan, coming from his easel behind the door.  s only Blandois. He is doing duty as a model to-day. I am making a study of him. It saves me money to turn him to some use. We poor painters have none to spare.', 'It', 'A thousand pardons! But the Professore here is so inexorable with me, that I am afraid to stir.', 'Don  said Gowan coolly, as the sisters approached the easel.  s meant for. There he stands, you see. A bravo waiting for his prey, a distinguished noble waiting to save his country, the common enemy waiting to do somebody a bad turn, an angelic messenger waiting to do somebody a good turn--whatever you think he looks most like!', 'Say, Professore Mio, a poor gentleman waiting to do homage to elegance and beauty,', 'Or say, Cattivo Soggetto Mio, a murderer after the fact. Show that white hand of yours, Blandois. Put it outside the cloak. Keep it still.', 'He was formerly in some scuffle with another murderer, or with a victim, you observe, and these are the tokens of it. Outside the cloak, man!--Corpo di San Marco, what are you thinking of?', 'I am not afraid of him, but will you look at him?', 'Blandois! How can you be such a fool as to provoke him! By Heaven, and the other place too, he', 'Lion! Lion! Get back! Down, Lion! Get out of his sight, Blandois! What devil have you conjured into the dog?', 'I have done nothing to him.', 'Get out of his sight or I can ll kill you!', 'Now get you into that corner and lie down, or I', 'Come, come, Minnie! You know he is always good-humoured and tractable. Blandois must have irritated him,--made faces at him. The dog has his likings and dislikings, and Blandois is no great favourite of his; but I am sure you will give him a character, Minnie, for never having been like this before.', 'You furious brute, You shall do penance for this.', 'O, pray don  cried Little Dorrit.  t hurt him. See how gentle he is!', 'Who?', 'My dear child, s protest she might have said, You little fool, instead), ', 'Do you think he means to follow you all the way?', 'My precious child, I can s not such an enormous distance. All Venice would scarcely be that, I imagine, if he', 'And is he?', 'Well, my love, that really is an awkward question for me to answer, I believe he is. You had better ask Edward. He tells Edward he is, I believe. I understand he makes a perfect spectacle of himself at the Casino, and that sort of places, by going on about me. But you had better ask Edward if you want to know.', 'I wonder he doesn', 'My dear Amy, your wonder will soon cease, if I am rightly informed. I should not be at all surprised if he called to-day. The creature has only been waiting to get his courage up, I suspect.', 'Will you see him?', 'Indeed, my darling, that', 'When you asked me if I will see him, my dear, what do you mean?', 'I mean, I think I rather mean what do you mean, dear Fanny?', 'Now tell me, my little pet. When we saw that woman at Martigny, how did you think she carried it off? Did you see what she decided on in a moment?', 'No, Fanny.', 'Then I ll never refer to that meeting under such different circumstances, and I s _her_ way out of a difficulty. What did I tell you when we came away from Harley Street that time? She is as insolent and false as any woman in the world. But in the first capacity, my love, she may find people who can match her.', 'Not only that, but she gives the same charge to Young Sparkler; and doesn t call it a head), that he is to pretend to have been first struck with me in that Inn Yard.', 'Why?', 'Why? Good gracious, my love! how can you ask? Don t you see that she puts the deception upon us, and makes a pretence, while she shifts it from her own shoulders (very good shoulders they are too, I must say), of considering our feelings?', 'But we can always go back to the plain truth.', 'Yes, but if you please we won  retorted Fanny.  s hers, and she shall have enough of it.', 'No, She shall find me go her way. She took it, and I ll go on improving that woman s ten times as handsome and expensive as she once gave me from hers!', 'Encourage him, my dear? that depends upon what you call encourage. No, I don ll make a slave of him.', 'I shall make him fetch and carry, my dear, and I shall make him subject to me. And if I don', 'Do you think--dear Fanny, don', 'I can  answered Fanny, with supreme indifference; ', 'Thank you, she', 'In Venice?', 'In Rome, I am here by myself, myself. I came to call upon Mr Edward Dorrit myself. Indeed, upon Mr Dorrit likewise. In fact, upon the family.', 'I hear you are acquainted, Mr Sparkler, with--ha--Mr Gowan. Mr Henry Gowan?', 'with--ha--Mr Gowan. Mr Henry Gowan?', 'Perfectly, sir, His mother and my mother are cronies in fact.', 'If I had thought of it, Amy, you should have despatched a note to them, asking them to dine to-day. Some of our people could have--ha--fetched them, and taken them home. We could have spared a--hum--gondola for that purpose. I am sorry to have forgotten this. Pray remind me of them to-morrow.', 'Pray, does Mr Henry Gowan paint--ha--Portraits?', 'He has no particular walk?', 'No speciality?', 'Well! It would be very agreeable to me to present a gentleman so connected, with some--ha--Testimonial of my desire to further his interests, and develop the--hum--germs of his genius. I think I must engage Mr Gowan to paint my picture. If the result should be--ha--mutually satisfactory, I might afterwards engage him to try his hand upon my family.', 'Gowan has had a loss, since he was made happy to-day by a visit from fair ladies.', 'A loss?', 'A loss, His dog Lion.', 'He is dead,', 'Dead? That noble dog?', 'Faith, dear ladies! somebody has poisoned that noble dog. He is as dead as the Doges!', 'Amy, I am going to put something into your little head. You won', 'I don s likely, dear,', 'Come, I  said Fanny. ', '_Now_, can you guess, Amy?', 'No, dear. Unless I have done anything,', 'Oh, our Amy, our Amy! What a timid little goose our Amy is! But this is nothing to laugh at. On the contrary, I am very cross, my dear.', 'As it is not with me, Fanny, I don', 'Ah! But I do mind, and so will you, Pet, when I enlighten you. Amy, has it never struck you that somebody is monstrously polite to Mrs General?', 'Everybody is polite to Mrs General, Because--', 'Because she freezes them into it? I don', 'No; I dare say not. But he is, He is, Amy. And remember my words. Mrs General has designs on Pa!', 'Dear Fanny, do you think it possible that Mrs General has designs on any one?', 'Do I think it possible? My love, I know it. I tell you she has designs on Pa. And more than that, I tell you Pa considers her such a wonder, such a paragon of accomplishment, and such an acquisition to our family, that he is ready to get himself into a state of perfect infatuation with her at any moment. And that opens a pretty picture of things, I hope? Think of me with Mrs General for a Mama!', 'Lord, my darling, You might as well ask me how I know when a man is struck with myself! But, of course I do know. It happens pretty often: but I always know it. I know this in much the same way, I suppose. At all events, I know it.', 'You never heard Papa say anything?', 'Say anything? My dearest, darling child, what necessity has he had, yet awhile, to say anything?', 'And you have never heard Mrs General say anything?', 'My goodness me, Amy, is she the sort of woman to say anything? Isn t say anything, child. It would come out when she played it.', 'At least, you may be mistaken, Fanny. Now, may you not?', 'O yes, I _may_ be, but I am not. However, I am glad you can contemplate such an escape, my dear, and I am glad that you can take this for the present with sufficient coolness to think of such a chance. It makes me hope that you may be able to bear the connection. I should not be able to bear it, and I should not try. I', 'O, you would never marry him, Fanny, under any circumstances.', 'Upon my word, my dear, I wouldn s no knowing what might happen. Especially as I should have many opportunities, afterwards, of treating that woman, his mother, in her own style. Which I most decidedly should not be slow to avail myself of, Amy.', 'It may be a defect in my mental vision, Blandois, but may I die if I see what you have to do with this.', 'Death of my life, nor I neither, except that I thought I was serving my friend.', 'By putting an upstart  said Gowan, frowning. ', 'Do you mean that? Tell your other friend to get his head painted for the sign of some public-house, and to get it done by a sign-painter. Who am I, and who is he?', 'Professore, and who is Blandois?', 'When you will, as you please. What have I to do with it? What is it to me?', 'I can tell you what it is to me, Bread and cheese. One must eat! So come along, my Blandois.', 'You are very good, I have not forsworn society since I joined the brotherhood of the brush (the most delightful fellows on the face of the earth), and am glad enough to smell the old fine gunpowder now and then, though it did blow me into mid-air and my present calling. You  and here he laughed again in the easiest way,  s not so; upon my life I can', 'Again you are very good, Mr Dorrit, I hear you are going to Rome. I am going to Rome, having friends there. Let me begin to do you the injustice I have conspired to do you, there--not here. We shall all be hurried during the rest of our stay here; and though there t fall on to order, in a hurry, for the mere sake of the sixpences.', 'You were going to talk about me. Ha! Behold me here to prevent it!', 'Gowan is coming here?', 'Not coming! Permit your devoted servant, when you leave here, to escort you home.', 'Thank you: I am not going home.', 'Not going home! Then I am forlorn.', 'He killed the dog.', 'Does Mr Gowan know it?', 'No one knows it. Don', 'I--I think so,', 'Henry likes him, and he will not think ill of him; he is so generous and open himself. But you and I feel sure that we think of him as he deserves. He argued with Henry that the dog had been already poisoned when he changed so, and sprang at him. Henry believes it, but we do not. I see he is listening, but can', 'So delighted, to resume an acquaintance so inauspiciously begun at Martigny.', 'At Martigny, of course, Charmed, I am sure!', 'I understand, from my son Edmund Sparkler, that he has already improved that chance occasion. He has returned quite transported with Venice.', 'Indeed? Was he there long?', 'I might refer that question to Mr Dorrit, Edmund having been so much indebted to him for rendering his stay agreeable.', 'Oh, pray don  returned Fanny. ', 'Except, my dear, except--ha--as it afforded me unusual gratification to--hum--show by any means, however slight and worthless, the--ha, hum--high estimation in which, in--ha--common with the rest of the world, I hold so distinguished and princely a character as Mr Merdle', 'I have been--ha--disappointed, madam, to understand from Mr Sparkler that there is no great--hum--probability of Mr Merdle', 'Why, indeed, he is so much engaged and in such request, that I fear not. He has not been able to get abroad for years. You, Miss Dorrit, I believe have been almost continually abroad for a long time.', 'Oh dear yes, An immense number of years.', 'So I should have inferred,', 'Exactly,', 'I trust, however, that if I have not the--hum--great advantage of becoming known to Mr Merdle on this side of the Alps or Mediterranean, I shall have that honour on returning to England. It is an honour I particularly desire and shall particularly esteem.', 'Mr Merdle, will esteem it, I am sure, no less.', 'No workman? You would have been a thorough workman if you had given yourself to it. You have as good a head for understanding such things as I have met with.', 'A totally uneducated one, I am sorry to add,', 'I don  returned Doyce,  t have you say that. No man of sense who has been generally improved, and has improved himself, can be called quite uneducated as to anything. I don', 'At all events, this sounds as if we were exchanging compliments, but we know we are not--I shall have the advantage of as plain an explanation as can be given.', 'Well! I', 'Doyce, it came to this at last--that the business was to be sunk with Heaven knows how many more wrecks, or begun all over again?', 'Yes, that', 'And pretty fellows too!', 'The usual thing! I must not make a martyr of myself, when I am one of so large a company.', 'Relinquish it, or begin it all over again?', 'That was exactly the long and the short of it,', 'Then, my friend, it shall be begun all over again!', 'Yes, Doyce, at an end as far as your efforts and rebuffs are concerned, I admit, but not as far as mine are. I am younger than you: I have only once set foot in that precious office, and I am fresh game for them. Come! I', 'And how do you both do, Papa and Mama Meagles? And when did you last hear from or about my poor fellow?', 'And the dear pretty one? Have you later news of her than I have?', 'I am sure, it s the greatest comfort in life. I suppose they', 'Oh! my dearest Meagles! how can you, as a man of the world and one of the most business-like of human beings--for you know you are business-like, and a great deal too much for us who are not--', '--How can you talk about their managing their little means? My poor dear fellow! The idea of his managing hundreds! And the sweet pretty creature too. The notion of her managing! Papa Meagles! Don', 'Well, ma  said Mr Meagles, gravely, ', 'My dear good man--I use no ceremony with you, because we are a kind of relations;--positively, Mama Meagles, a kind of relations! My dear good man, in this world none of us can have _everything_ our own way.', 'a kind of relations! My dear good man, in this world none of us can have _everything_ our own way.', 'And may I ask, ma  retorted Mr Meagles, a little heightened in colour, ', 'Oh, nobody, nobody! I was going to say--but you put me out. You interrupting Papa, what was I going to say?', 'Ah! Yes, to be sure! You must remember that my poor fellow has always been accustomed to expectations. They may have been realised, or they may not have been realised--', 'Let us say, then, may not have been realised,', 'It makes no difference. My poor fellow has been accustomed to that sort of thing, and of course you knew it, and were prepared for the consequences. I myself always clearly foresaw the consequences, and am not surprised. And you must not be surprised. In fact, can', 'And now here  Mrs Gowan pursued,  t be helped now; it t talk of anticipating means, Papa Meagles, as a discovery; because that would be too much.', 'Too much, ma', 'There, there! Too much for my poor fellow t be unmarried. There, there! I know that! You needn', 'Mrs Gowan, ma  said Mr Meagles, ', 'Papa Meagles, probably not.', 'Therefore, my good madam, I hope I may, without offence, ask to have no such mystification played off upon me.', 'Mama Meagles, your good man is incomprehensible.', 'Mother, you are inexpert, my dear, and it is not a fair match. Let me beg of you to remain quiet. Come, Mrs Gowan, come! Let us try to be sensible; let us try to be good-natured; let us try to be fair. Don t pity Pet. And don s not considerate, it t let us say that we hope Pet will make Henry happy, or even that we hope Henry will make Pet happy, but let us hope they will make each other happy.', 'Yes, sure, and there leave it, father,', 'Why, mother, no, not exactly there. I can t look it.', 'Indeed you do not,', 'Thank you, ma s well. Notwithstanding which, I feel a little--I don', 'Say what you like, It is perfectly indifferent to me.', 'No, no, don  urged Mr Meagles,  s not responding amiably. I feel a little hurt when I hear references made to consequences having been foreseen, and to its being too late now, and so forth.', '_Do_ you, Papa Meagles? I am not surprised.', 'Well, ma  reasoned Mr Meagles, ', 'I am not responsible, for your conscience, you know.', 'If I am unluckily obliged to carry a cap about with me, which is yours and fits you, don', 'Why, good Lord, ma  Mr Meagles broke out,  s as much as to state--', 'Now, Papa Meagles, Papa Meagles, perhaps to prevent confusion, I had better speak for myself than trouble your kindness to speak for me. It', 'Mother! Do you hear this! Arthur! Do you hear this!', 'The room being of a convenient size, and quite charmingly adapted in all respects to conversation, I should imagine I am audible in any part of it.', 'O, my dear sir! they were well understood by me, I assure you.', 'I never, ma  said Mr Meagles, ', 'I understood the whole affair, As you have appealed to Mr Clennam, I may appeal to Mr Clennam, too. He knows whether I did or not.', 'I am very unwilling, to take any share in this discussion, more especially because I wish to preserve the best understanding and the clearest relations with Mr Henry Gowan. I have very strong reasons indeed, for entertaining that wish. Mrs Gowan attributed certain views of furthering the marriage to my friend here, in conversation with me before it took place; and I endeavoured to undeceive her. I represented that I knew him (as I did and do) to be strenuously opposed to it, both in opinion and action.', 'You see? You see? Very good! Now Papa and Mama Meagles both! allow me to take the liberty of putting an end to this rather formidable controversy. I will not say another word upon its merits. I will only say that it is an additional proof of what one knows from all experience; that this kind of thing never answers--as my poor fellow himself would say, that it never pays--in one word, that it never does.', 'It is in vain, for people to attempt to get on together who have such extremely different antecedents; who are jumbled against each other in this accidental, matrimonial sort of way; and who cannot look at the untoward circumstance which has shaken them together in the same light. It never does.', 'No, don  returned Mrs Gowan.  s pretty wife, and I shall always make a point of being on the most affectionate terms with her. But as to these terms, semi-family and semi-stranger, semi-goring and semi-boring, they form a state of things quite amusing in its impracticability. I assure you it never does.', 'Arthur, my dear boy, Mother and I have been talking this over, and we don', 'I understand,', 'Even that affable and condescending ornament of society, may misrepresent us, we are afraid. We could bear a great deal, Arthur, for her sake; but we think we would rather not bear that, if it was all the same to her.', 'Good, Go on.', 'You see, it might put us wrong with our son-in-law, it might even put us wrong with our daughter, and it might lead to a great deal of domestic trouble. You see, don', 'Yes, indeed, there is much reason in what you say.', 'So we are very much disposed, are Mother and I, to pack up bags and baggage and go among the Allongers and Marshongers once more. I mean, we are very much disposed to be off, strike right through France into Italy, and see our Pet.', 'And I don  replied Arthur, touched by the motherly anticipation in the bright face of Mrs Meagles (she must have been very like her daughter, once), ', 'Is it really, though? Mother, this is being backed in an idea!', 'The fact is, besides, Arthur, that my son-in-law is already in debt again, and that I suppose I must clear him again. It may be as well, even on this account, that I should step over there, and look him up in a friendly way. Then again, here s state of health, and that she should not be left to feel lonesome at the present time. It s never so Homely, why you see, Rome is Rome, though it', 'All perfectly true, and all sufficient reasons for going.', 'I am glad you think so; it decides me. Mother, my dear, you may get ready. We have lost our pleasant interpreter (she spoke three foreign languages beautifully, Arthur; you have heard her many a time), and you must pull me through it, Mother, as well as you can. I require a deal of pulling through, Arthur, a deal of pulling through. I stick at everything beyond a noun-substantive--and I stick at him, if he', 'Now I think of it, there', 'Well! I am much obliged to you, my boy, but I think not. No, I think I t like the thought of taking him away. More than that, there s no knowing when we may come back to it. No, Arthur, I', 'If you would come down and stay here for a change, when it wouldn  Mr Meagles resumed,  s the weather for travelling now?', 'What is it, Mrs Tickit?', 'Sir, if ever I saw the led away and deluded child in my life, I saw her identically in the dusk of yesterday evening.', 'You don', 'Coram yes I do!', 'Where?', 'Mr Clennam, I was a little heavy in my eyes, being that I was waiting longer than customary for my cup of tea which was then preparing by Mary Jane. I was not sleeping, nor what a person would term correctly, dozing. I was more what a person would strictly call watching with my eyes closed.', 'Well, sir, I was thinking of one thing and thinking of another, just as you yourself might. Just as anybody might.', 'Precisely so, Well?', 'And when I do think of one thing and do think of another, I hardly need to tell you, Mr Clennam, that I think of the family. Because, dear me! a person  Mrs Tickit said this with an argumentative and philosophic air,  t prevent them.', 'You find it so yourself, sir, I  said Mrs Tickit,  t our stations in life that changes us, Mr Clennam; thoughts is free!--As I was saying, I was thinking of one thing and thinking of another, and thinking very much of the family. Not of the family in the present times only, but in the past times too. For when a person does begin thinking of one thing and thinking of another in that manner, as it', 'and we all find it so. It an s getting dark, what I say is, that all times seem to be present, and a person must get out of that state and consider before they can say which is which.', 'In consequence of which, when I quivered my eyes and saw her actual form and figure looking in at the gate, I let them close again without so much as starting, for that actual form and figure came so pat to the time when it belonged to the house as much as mine or your own, that I never thought at the moment of its having gone away. But, sir, when I quivered my eyes again, and saw that it wasn', 'You ran out directly?', 'I ran out, as fast as ever my feet would carry me; and if you t in the whole shining Heavens, no not so much as a finger of that young woman.', 'Went to and fro, and high and low, and saw no sign of her!', 'By Heaven, ma  he replied, making her another bow. ', 'I want neither the one nor the other from any one, and certainly not from you of all creatures. Go on with your report.', 'Am I pardoned?', 'You are paid, and that is all you want.', 'A thousand pardons? My faith! Then it', 'No. I tell you I must get it before I can give it to you.', 'It  said the man.  s nothing in such a service. I am without money to-night, by chance. I have a good banker in this city, but I would not wish to draw upon the house until the time when I shall draw for a round sum.', 'Harriet, arrange with him--this gentleman here--for sending him some money to-morrow.', 'My goodness Arthur! Doyce and Clennam what a start and a surprise for though not far from the machinery and foundry business and surely might be taken sometimes if at no other time about mid-day when a glass of sherry and a humble sandwich of whatever cold meat in the larder might not come amiss nor taste the worse for being friendly for you know you buy it somewhere and wherever bought a profit must be made or they would never keep the place it stands to reason without a motive still never seen and learnt now not to be expected, for as Mr F. himself said if seeing is believing not seeing is believing too and when you don re not remembered not that I expect you Arthur Doyce and Clennam to remember me why should I for the days are gone but bring another teacup here directly and tell her fresh toast and pray sit near the fire.', 'And now pray tell me something all you know, about the good dear quiet little thing and all the changes of her fortunes carriage people now no doubt and horses without number most romantic, a coat of arms of course and wild beasts on their hind legs showing it as if it was a copy they had done with mouths from ear to ear good gracious, and has she her health which is the first consideration after all for what is wealth without it Mr F. himself so often saying when his twinges came that sixpence a day and find yourself and no gout so much preferable, not that he could have lived on anything like it being the last man or that the previous little thing though far too familiar an expression now had any tendency of that sort much too slight and small but looked so fragile bless her?', 'She is in Italy, with all her family, Flora,', 'In Italy is she really? with the grapes growing everywhere and lava necklaces and bracelets too that land of poetry with burning mountains picturesque beyond belief though if the organ-boys come away from the neighbourhood not to be scorched nobody can wonder being so young and bringing their white mice with them most humane, and is she really in that favoured land with nothing but blue about her and dying gladiators and Belvederes though Mr F. himself did not believe for his objection when in spirits was that the images could not be true there being no medium between expensive quantities of linen badly got up and all in creases and none whatever, which certainly does not seem probable though perhaps in consequence of the extremes of rich and poor which may account for it.', 'Venice Preserved too, I think you have been there is it well or ill preserved for people differ so and Maccaroni if they really eat it like the conjurors why not cut it shorter, you are acquainted Arthur--dear Doyce and Clennam at least not dear and most assuredly not Doyce for I have not the pleasure but pray excuse me--acquainted I believe with Mantua what _has_ it got to do with Mantua-making for I never have been able to conceive?', 'I believe there is no connection, Flora, between the two,', 'Upon your word no isn s like me I run away with an idea and having none to spare I keep it, alas there was a time dear Arthur that is to say decidedly not dear nor Arthur neither but you understand me when one bright idea gilded the what', 'I have the greatest desire, Flora, to speak to some one who is now in this house--with Mr Casby no doubt. Some one whom I saw come in, and who, in a misguided and deplorable way, has deserted the house of a friend of mine.', 'Papa sees so many and such odd people, that I shouldn ll mind and at the same time not mind Mr F. m gone.', 'None of your eyes at me, s Aunt, shivering with hostility. ', 'Take that.', 'That s Aunt, elevating her voice into a cry of considerable power, exclaimed,  s too proud a chap to eat it! very lively to-night', 'He has a proud stomach, this chap, s relation, on being reseated. ', 'Oh! I don', 'Give him a meal of chaff, I tell you, s Aunt, glaring round Flora on her enemy.  s the only thing for a proud stomach. Let him eat up every morsel. Drat him, give him a meal of chaff!', 'Such an inconvenient staircase and so many corner-stairs Arthur, would you object to putting your arm round me under my pelerine?', 'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. I hope you are well, sir, I hope you are well. Please to sit down, please to sit down.', 'I had hoped, sir, not to find you alone.', 'Ah, indeed? Ah, indeed?', 'I told you so you know papa,', 'Ah, to be sure! Yes, just so. Ah, to be sure!', 'Pray, sir, is Miss Wade gone?', 'Miss--? Oh, you call her Wade, Highly proper.', 'Wade, Oh, always Wade.', 'I beg your pardon, Mr Casby--', 'Not so, not so, not so.', '--But, Miss Wade had an attendant with her--a young woman brought up by friends of mine, over whom her influence is not considered very salutary, and to whom I should be glad to have the opportunity of giving the assurance that she has not yet forfeited the interest of those protectors.', 'Really, really?', 'Will you therefore be so good as to give me the address of Miss Wade?', 'Dear, dear, dear! how very unfortunate! If you had only sent in to me when they were here! I observed the young woman, Mr Clennam. A fine full-coloured young woman, Mr Clennam, with very dark hair and very dark eyes. If I mistake not, if I mistake not?', 'Dear, dear, dear! Tut, tut, tut! what a pity, what a pity! I have no address, sir. Miss Wade mostly lives abroad, Mr Clennam. She has done so for some years, and she is (if I may say so of a fellow-creature and a lady) fitful and uncertain to a fault, Mr Clennam. I may not see her again for a long, long time. I may never see her again. What a pity, what a pity!', 'Mr Casby, could you, for the satisfaction of the friends I have mentioned, and under any obligation of secrecy that you may consider it your duty to impose, give me any information at all touching Miss Wade? I have seen her abroad, and I have seen her at home, but I know nothing of her. Could you give me any account of her whatever?', 'None, None at all. Dear, dear, dear! What a real pity that she stayed so short a time, and you delayed! As confidential agency business, agency business, I have occasionally paid this lady money; but what satisfaction is it to you, sir, to know that?', 'Truly, none at all,', 'Truly, none at all, sir. You hit the wise answer, Mr Clennam. Truly, none at all, sir.', 'I suppose they were really gone, Pancks?', 'Yes, They were really gone.', 'Does he know where to find that lady?', 'Can', 'I expect, I know as much about her as she knows about herself. She is somebody s, nobody em in any street, she may make chance acquaintance of  em. She knows nothing about any relative whatever. Never did. Never will.', 'Mr Casby could enlighten her, perhaps?', 'May be, I expect so, but don t do without it. Sometimes she t touch it for a length of time; sometimes she', 'I think, I by chance know what occasion--I mean into whose pocket the money is to go.', 'Indeed? If it t trust myself to that woman, young and handsome as she is, if I had wronged her; no, not for twice my proprietor  Pancks added as a saving clause, ', 'The wonder is to me, that she has never done for my proprietor, as the only person connected with her story she can lay hold of. Mentioning that, I may tell you, between ourselves, that I am sometimes tempted to do for him myself.', 'Understand me, s arm;  t mean, cut his throat. But by all that ll cut his hair!', 'You are impatient, sir,', 'I am, sir. Death of my life, sir, it', 'It  cried the stranger. ', 'He', 'Fetch him! Fetch my Flintwinch! Tell him that it is his old Blandois, who comes from arriving in England; tell him that it is his little boy who is here, his cabbage, his well-beloved! Open the door, beautiful Mrs Flintwinch, and in the meantime let me to pass upstairs, to present my compliments--homage of Blandois--to my lady! My lady lives always? It is well. Open then!', 'Despatch then! Achieve then! Bring my Flintwinch! Announce me to my lady!', 'Pray tell me, Affery, who is this gentleman?', 'Pray tell me, Affery, who--ha, ha, ha!--who is this gentleman?', 'Affery, let them both come up. Arthur, come straight to me!', 'Arthur? s length, and bringing his heels together from a great stride in making him a flourishing bow. ', 'Madame, do me the honour to present me to Monsieur, your son. It appears to me, madame, that Monsieur, your son, is disposed to complain of me. He is not polite.', 'Sir, whoever you are, and however you come to be here, if I were the master of this house I would lose no time in placing you on the outside of it.', 'But you are not, Unfortunately for the gratification of your unreasonable temper, you are not the master, Arthur.', 'Unfortunately for the gratification of your unreasonable temper, you are not the master, Arthur.', 'I make no claim to be, mother. If I object to this person', 'In the case of objection being necessary, I could object for myself. And of course I should.', 'You have no right, to speak to the prejudice of any gentleman (least of all a gentleman from another country), because he does not conform to your standard, or square his behaviour by your rules. It is possible that the gentleman may, on similar grounds, object to you.', 'I hope so,', 'The gentleman, on a former occasion brought a letter of recommendation to us from highly esteemed and responsible correspondents. I am perfectly unacquainted with the gentleman  her habitual frown became stronger, as she very slowly and weightily emphasised those words; ', 'We shall see, madame!', 'We shall see, The gentleman is acquainted with Flintwinch; and when the gentleman was in London last, I remember to have heard that he and Flintwinch had some entertainment or good-fellowship together. I am not in the way of knowing much that passes outside this room, and the jingle of little worldly things beyond it does not much interest me; but I remember to have heard that.', 'Right, madame. It is true.', 'Therefore, Arthur, the gentleman comes here as an acquaintance, and no stranger; and it is much to be regretted that your unreasonable temper should have found offence in him. I regret it. I say so to the gentleman. You will not say so, I know; therefore I say it for myself and Flintwinch, since with us two the gentleman', 'How goes it, my cherished friend! How goes the world, my Flintwinch? Rose-coloured? So much the better, so much the better! Ah, but you look charming! Ah, but you look young and fresh as the flowers of Spring! Ah, good little boy! Brave child, brave child!', 'I had a presentiment, last time, that we should be better and more intimately acquainted. Is it coming on you, Flintwinch? Is it yet coming on?', 'Why, no, sir, Not unusually. Hadn', 'Ah, Little joker! Little pig! Ha ha ha ha!', 'Please to leave us to our business, Arthur.', 'Mother, I do so with reluctance.', 'Never mind with what, or with what not. Please to leave us. Come back at any other time when you may consider it a duty to bury half an hour wearily here. Good night.', 'I leave your--your business acquaintance in my mother  said Clennam, ', 'Good night, mother.', 'Good night.', 'I had a friend once, my good comrade Flintwinch, s retreating steps, that he lingered near the door;  t have confided himself alone by night with two people who had an interest in getting him under the ground--my faith! not even in a respectable house like this--unless he was bodily too strong for them. Bah! What a poltroon, my Flintwinch! Eh?', 'A cur, sir.', 'Agreed! A cur. But he wouldn t have drunk from a glass of water under such circumstances--not even in a respectable house like this, my Flintwinch--unless he had seen one of them drink first, and swallow too!', 'For Heaven  whispered Clennam, as she opened the door for him in the dark hall, and he groped his way to the sight of the night-sky, ', 'Don ve been in a dream for ever so long. Go away!', 'Indeed, how so?', 'how so?', 'Nay, If you don', 'Our illustrious host and friend, our shining mercantile star;--going into politics?', 'Going? He has been in Parliament some time, you know,', 'True, he has been in Parliament for some time. Yet hitherto our star has been a vacillating and wavering star? Humph?', 'Just so, just so, and therefore I spoke of our sitting _in Banco_ to take a special argument--meaning this to be a high and solemn occasion, when, as Captain Macheath says, "the judges are met: a terrible show!" We lawyers are sufficiently liberal, you see, to quote the Captain, though the Captain is severe upon us. Nevertheless, I think I could put in evidence an admission of the Captain  said Bar, with a little jocose roll of his head; for, in his legal current of speech, he always assumed the air of rallying himself with the best grace in the world;  s that Law, in the gross, is at least intended to be impartial. For what says the Captain, if I quote him correctly--and if not, s shoulder, ', 'Your mentioning pears recalls to my remembrance a pear-tree, And so we pass, through the various changes of life, from Eton pears to Parliamentary pairs,', 'He is away with Mrs Merdle, It is not indispensable for him to be on the spot.', 'The magic name of Merdle, no doubt will suffice for all.', 'Why--yes--I believe so, I believe the people in my interest down there will not make any difficulty.', 'Model people!', 'I am glad you approve of them,', 'And the people of those other two places, now, we lawyers are always curious, always inquisitive, always picking up odds and ends for our patchwork minds, since there is no knowing when and where they may fit into some corner;--the people of those other two places now? Do they yield so laudably to the vast and cumulative influence of such enterprise and such renown; do those little rills become absorbed so quietly and easily, and, as it were by the influence of natural laws, so beautifully, in the swoop of the majestic stream as it flows upon its wondrous way enriching the surrounding lands; that their course is perfectly to be calculated, and distinctly to be predicated?', 'They are perfectly aware, sir, of their duty to Society. They will return anybody I send to them for that purpose.', 'Cheering to know, Cheering to know.', 'Pray, what is this story I have heard of a gentleman long confined in a debtors', 'I only know this much, that he has given the Department with which I have the honour to be associated; no end of trouble, and has put us into innumerable fixes.', 'Fixes? Fixes?', 'Fixes?', 'A very perplexing business indeed,', 'What, was the character of his business; what was the nature of these--a--Fixes, Ferdinand?', 'Oh, it  returned that gentleman;   said this handsome young Barnacle, laughing heartily,  t have more trouble about it." "You are right, old fellow," I told him, "and in future you', 'May I ask, if Mr Darrit--or Dorrit--has any family?', 'Oh! you are acquainted with him?', 'Mrs Merdle is. Mr Sparkler is, too. In fact, I rather believe that one of the young ladies has made an impression on Edmund Sparkler. He is susceptible, and--I--think--the conquest--', 'Did you ever see such a thing as this?', 'Often,', 'Unless I butt one of them into an appointed corner, and you butt the other, it will not come off after all.', 'Very good, I', 'I must get Merdle  said Ferdinand;  t--to the conference.', 'Since you do me the honour, t think this is to be done by one man. But if you will undertake to pen my lord into that furthest drawing-room where he is now so profoundly engaged, I will undertake to bring our dear Merdle into the presence, without the possibility of getting away.', 'Done! Done!', 'Now, then! Pay up! Come on!', 'I haven  Defaulter would reply.  t got so much as a single sixpence of it to bless myself with.', 'This won  Mr Pancks would retort.  t expect it _will_ do; do you?', 'My proprietor isn  Mr Pancks would proceed.  t send me here for this. Pay up! Come!', 'If I was Mr Merdle, sir, you wouldn  the Defaulter would proceed with a shake of the head.  d pay up so quick then, Mr Pancks, that you shouldn', 'No, sir, I only wish you _were_ him, sir.', 'Only wish you _were_ him, sir.', 'You  the Defaulter would go on with rising spirits,  t have to worry no one, then, sir. You wouldn t have to worry yourself. You d leave others easier, too, you would, if you were Mr Merdle.', 't it gratifying, Mr Pancks, though; really?', 'And how are _you_ getting on, Mrs Plornish, since we', 'Very steady, indeed, sir, Father, dear, would you go into the shop and tidy the window a little bit before tea, your taste being so beautiful?', 'It  said Mrs Plornish, lowering her voice; ', 'Hallo, old chap! Altro, old boy! What', 'E ask know, what go wrong?', 'Come into the happy little cottage, Padrona, Come there!', 'E ope you no fright, What appen? Peaka Padrona!', 'I have seen some one, I have rincontrato him.', 'Im? Oo him?', 'A bad man. A baddest man. I have hoped that I should never see him again.', 'Ow you know him bad?', 'It does not matter, Padrona. I know it too well.', 'E see you?', 'No. I hope not. I believe not.', 'He says, that he has met a bad man, but he hopes the bad man didn  inquired Mrs Plornish, reverting to the Italian language, ', 'Padrona, dearest, do not ask, I pray. Once again I say it matters not. I have fear of this man. I do not wish to see him, I do not wish to be known of him--never again! Enough, most beautiful. Leave it.', 'But you are tired, sir. Let me make you a cup of tea, if you', 'John Edward Nandy, Sir. It t, and live to want ', 'Sir. It t, and live to want ', 'I am heartily of your opinion, Thomas, and which your opinion is the same as mine, and therefore no more words and not being backwards with that opinion, which opinion giving it as yes, Thomas, yes, is the opinion in which yourself and me must ever be unanimously jined by all, and where there is not difference of opinion there can be none but one opinion, which fully no, Thomas, Thomas, no!', 'If you will come home with me, Pancks, and will share what dinner or supper there is, it will be next door to an act of charity; for I am weary and out of sorts to-night.', 'Ask me to do a greater thing than that, when you want it done, and I', 'I am quite alone, My partner is away, busily engaged at a distance on his branch of our business, and you shall do just as you like.', 'Thank you. You didn', 'No. Why?', 'He  said Pancks. ', 'You surprise me! None whatever.', 'Perhaps you  said Pancks,  s a stranger?', 'Ask him what?', 'What he has on his mind.', 'I ought first to see for myself that he has something on his mind, I think, I have found him in every way so diligent, so grateful (for little enough), and so trustworthy, that it might look like suspecting him. And that would be very unjust.', 'True, But, I say! You oughtn s proprietor, Mr Clennam. You', 'For the matter of that, I have not a large proprietary share in Cavalletto. His carving is his livelihood. He keeps the keys of the Factory, watches it every alternate night, and acts as a sort of housekeeper to it generally; but we have little work in the way of his ingenuity, though we give him what we have. No! I am rather his adviser than his proprietor. To call me his standing counsel and his banker would be nearer the fact. Speaking of being his banker, is it not curious, Pancks, that the ventures which run just now in so many people s?', 'Ventures? What ventures?', 'These Merdle enterprises.', 'Oh! Investments, Ay, ay! I didn', 'Yes. Investments is the word.', 'I am going back to it, you see,', 'Yes. I see you are going back to it,', 'Wasn s head? Eh? Wasn', 'That was what I said.', 'Ay! But think of the whole Yard having got it. Think of their all meeting me with it, on my collecting days, here and there and everywhere. Whether they pay, or whether they don', 'Very strange how these runs on an infatuation prevail,', 'An  returned Pancks. After smoking for a minute or so, more drily than comported with his recent oiling, he added:  t understand the subject.', 'Not a bit,', 'Not a bit, Know nothing of figures. Know nothing of money questions. Never made a calculation. Never worked it, sir!', 'If they had--', 'If they had?', 'I thought you--spoke,', 'Not at all, Not yet. I may in a minute. If they had?', 'If they had, why, I suppose they would have known better.', 'How so, Mr Clennam? They t mean to be, but they', 'Right in sharing Cavalletto', 'Per-fectly, sir, I ve made the calculations. I re safe and genuine.', 'Do you mean, my good Pancks, that you would put that thousand pounds of yours, let us say, for instance, out at this kind of interest?', 'Certainly, Already done it, sir.', 'I tell you, Mr Clennam, I  said Pancks.  s a man of immense resources--enormous capital--government influence. They re safe. They', 'Well! You surprise me!', 'Bah! Don s what you ought to do yourself! Why don', 'And you have really invested, your thousand pounds, Pancks?', 'your thousand pounds, Pancks?', 'To be sure, sir! And only wish it ten!', 'Hard indeed, But you manage for him, Mr Clennam?', 'How do you mean?', 'Manage the money part of the business?', 'Yes. As well as I can.', 'Manage it better, sir, Recompense him for his toils and disappointments. Give him the chances of the time. He', 'I do my best, Pancks, As to duly weighing and considering these new enterprises of which I have had no experience, I doubt if I am fit for it, I am growing old.', 'Growing old? Ha, ha!', 'Growing old? Hear, hear, hear! Old? Hear him, hear him!', 'Young, old, or middle-aged, Pancks, I am in a very anxious and uncertain state; a state that even leads me to doubt whether anything now seeming to belong to me, may be really mine. Shall I tell you how this is? Shall I put a great trust in you?', 'You shall, sir, if you believe me worthy of it.', 'I do.', 'You may!', 'Brings me back, sir, s knee,  t say anything of your making yourself poor to repair a wrong you never committed. That', 'Be as rich as you can, sir, Be as rich as you honestly can. It t know what depends upon you.', 'Well, well, well! Enough for to-night.', 'One word more, Mr Clennam, and then enough for to-night. Why should you leave all the gains to the gluttons, knaves, and impostors? Why should you leave all the gains that are to be got to my proprietor and the like of him? Yet you s my business to see it. Therefore I say, Go in and win!', 'But what of Go in and lose?', 'Can  returned Pancks.  t be done!', 'Dear Fanny, what is the matter? Tell me.', 'Matter, you little Mole, If you were not the blindest of the blind, you would have no occasion to ask me. The idea of daring to pretend to assert that you have eyes in your head, and yet ask me what', 'Is it Mr Sparkler, dear?', 'Mis-ter Spark-ler! No, Miss Bat, it is not.', 'I don', 'Stuff and nonsense! I am as well as you are. Perhaps I might say better, and yet make no boast of it.', 'But, I tell you what, my Pet, s gentleness had calmed her, ', 'Quite so, my dear, Let us talk about it. I am rational again now, and you shall advise me. _Will_ you advise me, my sweet child?', 'Thank you, dearest Amy, You are my anchor.', 'My love, our characters and points of view are sufficiently different (kiss me again, my darling), to make it very probable that I shall surprise you by what I am going to say. What I am going to say, my dear, is, that notwithstanding our property, we labour, socially speaking, under disadvantages. You don', 'I have no doubt I shall, after a few words more.', 'Well, my dear, what I mean is, that we are, after all, newcomers into fashionable life.', 'I am sure, Fanny, no one need find that out in you.', 'no one need find that out in you.', 'Well, my dear child, perhaps not, though it  Here she dabbed her sister But you are, as is well known, the dearest little thing that ever was! To resume, my child. Pa is extremely gentlemanly and extremely well informed, but he is, in some trifling respects, a little different from other gentlemen of his fortune: partly on account of what he has gone through, poor dear: partly, I fancy, on account of its often running in his mind that other people are thinking about that, while he is talking to them. Uncle, my love, is altogether unpresentable. Though a dear creature to whom I am tenderly attached, he is, socially speaking, shocking. Edward is frightfully expensive and dissipated. I don t do it well, and that he doesn s-worth in the sort of dissipated reputation that attaches to him.', 'Poor Edward!', 'Yes. And poor you and me, too, Very true! Then, my dear, we have no mother, and we have a Mrs General. And I tell you again, darling, that Mrs General, if I may reverse a common proverb and adapt it to her, is a cat in gloves who _will_ catch mice. That woman, I am quite sure and confident, will be our mother-in-law.', 'Very true! Then, my dear, we have no mother, and we have a Mrs General. And I tell you again, darling, that Mrs General, if I may reverse a common proverb and adapt it to her, is a cat in gloves who _will_ catch mice. That woman, I am quite sure and confident, will be our mother-in-law.', 'I can hardly think, Fanny--', 'Now, don  said she,   Feeling that she had been sharp again, she dabbed her sister To resume once more, my dear. It then becomes a question with me (I am proud and spirited, Amy, as you very well know: too much so, I dare say) whether I shall make up my mind to take it upon myself to carry the family through.', 'How?', 'I will not, submit to be mother-in-lawed by Mrs General; and I will not submit to be, in any respect whatever, either patronised or tormented by Mrs Merdle.', 'That he has somehow or other, and how is of no consequence, attained a very good position, no one can deny. That it is a very good connection, no one can deny. And as to the question of clever or not clever, I doubt very much whether a clever husband would be suitable to me. I cannot submit. I should not be able to defer to him enough.', 'O, my dear Fanny! If you loved any one, all this feeling would change. If you loved any one, you would no more be yourself, but you would quite lose and forget yourself in your devotion to him. If you loved him, Fanny--', 'O, indeed! Really? Bless me, how much some people know of some subjects! They say every one has a subject, and I certainly seem to have hit upon yours, Amy. There, you little thing, I was only in fun, s forehead;  t you be a silly puss, and don ll go back to myself.', 'Dear Fanny, let me say first, that I would far rather we worked for a scanty living again than I would see you rich and married to Mr Sparkler.', '_Let_ you say, my dear? Why, of course, I will _let_ you say anything. There is no constraint upon you, I hope. We are together to talk it over. And as to marrying Mr Sparkler, I have not the slightest intention of doing so to-night, my dear, or to-morrow morning either.', 'But at some time?', 'At no time, for anything I know at present, You talk about the clever men, you little thing! It t see them anywhere near _me_!', 'My dear Fanny, so short a time--', 'Short time or long time, I am impatient of our situation. I don', 'Fanny, my dear Fanny, you know that you have qualities to make you the wife of one very superior to Mr Sparkler.', 'Amy, my dear Amy, I know that I wish to have a more defined and distinct position, in which I can assert myself with greater effect against that insolent woman.', 'Would you therefore--forgive my asking, Fanny--therefore marry her son?', 'Why, perhaps, There may be many less promising ways of arriving at an end than that, my dear. That piece of insolence may think, now, that it would be a great success to get her son off upon me, and shelve me. But, perhaps, she little thinks how I would retort upon her if I married her son. I would oppose her in everything, and compete with her. I would make it the business of my life.', 'One thing I could certainly do, my child: I could make her older. And I would!', 'I would talk of her as an old woman. I would pretend to know--if I didn', 'My dear sister, would you condemn yourself to an unhappy life for this?', 'It wouldn', 'Figure! Figure, Amy! Well. The woman has a good figure. I will give her her due, and not deny it. But is it so far beyond all others that it is altogether unapproachable? Upon my word, I am not so sure of it. Give some much younger woman the latitude as to dress that she has, being married; and we would see about that, my dear!', 'And the dancer, Amy, that she has quite forgotten--the dancer who bore no sort of resemblance to me, and of whom I never remind her, oh dear no!--should dance through her life, and dance in her way, to such a tune as would disturb her insolent placidity a little. Just a little, my dear Amy, just a little!', 'Now, don  she said in a sterner way, ', 'Well, Amy, what are you thinking of, little one?', 'I was thinking of you, Fanny.', 'No? What a coincidence! I declare here', 'Well, my little sister, I suppose you know what this means?', 'She s doated on, and there s arranged--', 'You needn', 'No, my love,', 'In short, pet, on the whole, we are engaged. We must tell papa about it either to-night or to-morrow, according to the opportunities. Then it', 'My dear Fanny, I should like to say a word to Amy.', 'Well, well! Say it for goodness', 'I am convinced, my dear Amy, that if ever there was a girl, next to your highly endowed and beautiful sister, who had no nonsense about her--', 'We know all about that, Edmund, Never mind that. Pray go on to something else besides our having no nonsense about us.', 'Yes, my love, And I assure you, Amy, that nothing can be a greater happiness to myself, myself--next to the happiness of being so highly honoured with the choice of a glorious girl who hasn', 'Pray, Edmund, pray!', 'My love, you  said Mr Sparkler,   said Mr Sparkler manfully, ', 'A knife and fork and an apartment, will ever be at Amy  said Mr Sparkler, ', 'Edmund, Edmund!', 'With submission, my soul, I know I have a habit of it, and I thank you very much, my adorable girl, for taking the trouble to correct it; but my mother is admitted on all sides to be a remarkably fine woman, and she really hasn', 'That may be, or may not be, but pray don', 'I will not, my love,', 'Then, in fact, you have nothing more to say, Edmund; have you?', 'So far from it, my adorable girl, I apologise for having said so much.', 'Have I the honour to conclude, madam, that the direction which Mr Sparkler', 'I assure you, Mr Dorrit, that, personally, I am charmed.', 'Personally, charmed.', 'I cannot, take upon myself to answer positively for Mr Merdle; gentlemen, especially gentlemen who are what Society calls capitalists, having their own ideas of these matters. But I should think--merely giving an opinion, Mr Dorrit--I should think Mr Merdle would be upon the whole, quite charmed.', 'Though, indeed, Mr Dorrit, it is scarcely necessary for me to make that remark, except in the mere openness of saying what is uppermost to one whom I so highly regard, and with whom I hope I may have the pleasure of being brought into still more agreeable relations. For one cannot but see the great probability of your considering such things from Mr Merdle s accidental fortune, or misfortune, to be engaged in business transactions, and that they, however vast, may a little cramp his horizons. I am a very child as to having any notion of business, but I am afraid, Mr Dorrit, it may have that tendency.', 'I say so much, merely because Mr Merdle has always taken the greatest interest in Edmund, and has always expressed the strongest desire to advance his prospects. Edmund', 'The preliminaries being so satisfactorily arranged, I think I will now, my dear, announce--ha--formally, to Mrs General--', 'Papa, I don', 'My dear, it will be an act of courtesy to--hum--a lady, well bred and refined--', 'Oh! I am sick of Mrs General  said Fanny. ', 'Tired, of--ha--Mrs General.', 'Quite disgusted with her, papa, I really don', 'Fanny, s levity: ', 'I mean, papa, that if Mrs General should happen to have any matrimonial projects of her own, I dare say they are quite enough to occupy her spare time. And that if she has not, so much the better; but still I don', 'Permit me to ask you, Fanny, why not?', 'Because she can find my engagement out for herself, papa, She is watchful enough, I dare say. I think I have seen her so. Let her find it out for herself. If she should not find it out for herself, she will know it when I am married. And I hope you will not consider me wanting in affection for you, papa, if I say it strikes me that will be quite enough for Mrs General.', 'Fanny, I am amazed, I am displeased by this--hum--this capricious and unintelligible display of animosity towards--ha--Mrs General.', 'Do not, if you please, papa, call it animosity, because I assure you I do not consider Mrs General worth my animosity.', 'Fanny, if I request you to remain here, while I formally announce to Mrs General, as an exemplary lady, who is--hum--a trusted member of this family, the--ha--the change that is contemplated among us; if I--ha--not only request it, but--hum--insist upon it--', 'Oh, papa, if you make so much of it as that, I have in duty nothing to do but comply. I hope I may have my thoughts upon the subject, however, for I really cannot help it under the circumstances.', 'Mrs General.', 'I beg your pardon, sir, I was wishful to know--', 'You wished to know nothing, sir, Don t. You are guilty of mockery, sir.', 'Don t. You are guilty of mockery, sir.', 'I assure you, sir--', 'Don  said Mr Dorrit. ', 'Only for my orders, sir.', 'It  said Mr Dorrit, ', 'Mrs General, take a chair.', 'Madam, as you have had the kindness to undertake the--hum--formation of my daughters, and as I am persuaded that nothing nearly affecting them can--ha--be indifferent to you--', 'Wholly impossible,', '--I therefore wish to announce to you, madam, that my daughter now present--', '--That my daughter Fanny is--ha--contracted to be married to Mr Sparkler, with whom you are acquainted. Hence, madam, you will be relieved of half your difficult charge--ha--difficult charge. But not, I hope, to the--hum--diminution of any other portion, direct or indirect, of the footing you have at present the kindness to occupy in my family.', 'Mr Dorrit, is ever considerate, and ever but too appreciative of my friendly services.', 'Miss Dorrit has no doubt exercised the soundest discretion of which the circumstances admitted, and I trust will allow me to offer her my sincere congratulations. When free from the trammels of passion, when occurring with the approbation of near relatives; and when cementing the proud structure of a family edifice; these are usually auspicious events. I trust Miss Dorrit will allow me to offer her my best congratulations.', 'Mr Dorrit, is ever most obliging; and for the attention, and I will add distinction, of having this confidence imparted to me by himself and Miss Dorrit at this early time, I beg to offer the tribute of my thanks. My thanks, and my congratulations, are equally the meed of Mr Dorrit and of Miss Dorrit.', 'To me, they are excessively gratifying--inexpressibly so. The relief of finding that you have no objection to make, Mrs General, quite takes a load off my mind, I am sure. I hardly know what I should have done, if you had interposed any objection, Mrs General.', 'To preserve your approbation, Mrs General, will of course be the highest object of my married life; to lose it, would of course be perfect wretchedness. I am sure your great kindness will not object, and I hope papa will not object, to my correcting a small mistake you have made, however. The best of us are so liable to mistakes, that even you, Mrs General, have fallen into a little error. The attention and distinction you have so impressively mentioned, Mrs General, as attaching to this confidence, are, I have no doubt, of the most complimentary and gratifying description; but they don s. I am deeply obliged to you for your encouragement and patronage, but it was papa who asked for it. I have to thank you, Mrs General, for relieving my breast of a great weight by so handsomely giving your consent to my engagement, but you have really nothing to thank me for. I hope you will always approve of my proceedings after I have left home and that my sister also may long remain the favoured object of your condescension, Mrs General.', 'Now, my child, I am going to tell you something. It is only this moment broached; and naturally I hurry to you the moment it _is_ broached.', 'Your marriage, Fanny?', 'My precious child, don s.', 'I am in no difficulty, and in no hurry. I am not wanted at any public office, or to give any vote anywhere else. But Edmund is. And Edmund is deeply dejected at the idea of going away by himself, and, indeed, I don s possible--and it generally is--to do a foolish thing, he is sure to do it.', 'It is far more Edmund', 'I see I am going to lose you, Fanny.', 'What a little thing you are, for anticipating one! Pray, my darling, hear me out. That woman, remains here until after Easter; so, in the case of my being married here and going to London with Edmund, I should have the start of her. That is something. Further, Amy. That woman being out of the way, I don s proposal to Pa that Edmund and I should take up our abode in that house--_you_ know--where you once went with a dancer, my dear, until our own house can be chosen and fitted up. Further still, Amy. Papa having always intended to go to town himself, in the spring,--you see, if Edmund and I were married here, we might go off to Florence, where papa might join us, and we might all three travel home together. Mr Merdle has entreated Pa to stay with him in that same mansion I have mentioned, and I suppose he will. But he is master of his own actions; and upon that point (which is not at all material) I can', 'And these are the arrangements, Fanny dear?', 'Arrangements! Now, really, child, you are a little trying. You know I particularly guarded myself against laying my words open to any such construction. What I said was, that certain questions present themselves; and these are the questions.', 'Now, my own sweet girl, it', 'Do you think, do you think, Fanny, that if you were to put it off for a few months, it might be, considering all things, best?', 'No, little Tortoise, I don', 'Don t I tell you, you dearest baby, that Edmund can t you know that he can', 'Yes, yes, Fanny. You said so, I know.', 'And you know it, I know, Well, my precious child! If he is not to be trusted by himself, it follows, I suppose, that I should go with him?', 'It--seems so, love,', 'Therefore, having heard the arrangements that are feasible to carry out that object, am I to understand, dearest Amy, that on the whole you advise me to make them?', 'It--seems so, love,', 'Very well, then I suppose it must be done! I came to you, my sweet, the moment I saw the doubt, and the necessity of deciding. I have now decided. So let it be.', 'Not that I contemplate doing without You, Amy, by any means, for I hope we shall ever be next to inseparable. And now, my pet, I am going to give you a word of advice. When you are left alone here with Mrs General--', 'I am to be left alone here with Mrs General?', 'Why, of course, my precious, till papa comes back! Unless you call Edward company, which he certainly is not, even when he is here, and still more certainly is not when he is away at Naples or in Sicily. I was going to say--but you are such a beloved little Marplot for putting one out--when you are left alone here with Mrs General, Amy, don t you comprehend her on any account. And if Pa should tell you when he comes back, that he has it in contemplation to make Mrs General your mama (which is not the less likely because I am going away), my advice to you is, that you say at once, "Papa, I beg to object most strongly. Fanny cautioned me about this, and she objected, and I object." I don t expect you to stand by it--indeed, I know you won s not all real, ugly as it is and unlikely as it appears that any One in their Senses would go to the expense of buying it) of Mrs General!', 'Amy, my dear, this is the close of a day, that has--ha--greatly impressed and gratified me.', 'A little tired you, dear, too?', 'No, no: I am not sensible of fatigue when it arises from an occasion so--hum--replete with gratification of the purest kind.', 'My dear, this is an occasion--ha--teeming with a good example. With a good example, my favourite and attached child--hum--to you.', 'Amy, your dear sister, our Fanny, has contracted ha hum--a marriage, eminently calculated to extend the basis of our--ha--connection, and to--hum--consolidate our social relations. My love, I trust that the time is not far distant when some--ha--eligible partner may be found for you.', 'Oh no! Let me stay with you. I beg and pray that I may stay with you! I want nothing but to stay and take care of you!', 'Nay, Amy, Amy, This is weak and foolish, weak and foolish. You have a--ha--responsibility imposed upon you by your position. It is to develop that position, and be--hum--worthy of that position. As to taking care of me; I can--ha--take care of myself. Or, if I should need to be taken care of, I--hum--can, with the--ha--blessing of Providence, be taken care of, I--ha hum--I cannot, my dear child, think of engrossing, and--ha--as it were, sacrificing you.', 'Don', 'Oh no, dear! Pray!', 'Amy, I am well persuaded that if the topic were referred to any person of superior social knowledge, of superior delicacy and sense--let us say, for instance, to--ha--Mrs General--that there would not be two opinions as to the--hum--affectionate character and propriety of my sentiments. But, as I know your loving and dutiful nature from--hum--from experience, I am quite satisfied that it is necessary to say no more. I have--hum--no husband to propose at present, my dear: I have not even one in view. I merely wish that we should--ha--understand each other. Hum. Good night, my dear and sole remaining daughter. Good night. God bless you!', 'Mr Merdle, this is--ha--indeed an honour. Permit me to express the--hum--sense, the high sense, I entertain of this--ha hum--highly gratifying act of attention. I am well aware, sir, of the many demands upon your time, and its--ha--enormous value, That you should--ha--at this early hour, bestow any of your priceless time upon me, is--ha--a compliment that I acknowledge with the greatest esteem.', 'You are very kind, Truly kind. You are well, I hope, Mr Merdle?', 'I am as well as I--yes, I am as well as I usually am,', 'Your occupations must be immense.', 'Tolerably so. But--Oh dear no, there', 'A little dyspeptic?', 'Very likely. But I--Oh, I am well enough,', 'Mrs Merdle, I left, as you will be prepared to hear, the--ha--observed of all observers, the--hum--admired of all admirers, the leading fascination and charm of Society in Rome. She was looking wonderfully well when I quitted it.', 'Mrs Merdle, is generally considered a very attractive woman. And she is, no doubt. I am sensible of her being so.', 'Who can be otherwise?', 'But, s waistcoat; ', 'I thought I would drive round the first thing, to offer my services, in case I can do anything for you; and to say that I hope you will at least do me the honour of dining with me to-day, and every day when you are not better engaged during your stay in town.', 'Do you stay long, sir?', 'I have not at present the intention, of--ha--exceeding a fortnight.', 'of--ha--exceeding a fortnight.', 'That', 'Hum. Yes, But the truth is--ha--my dear Mr Merdle, that I find a foreign life so well suited to my health and taste, that I--hum--have but two objects in my present visit to London. First, the--ha--the distinguished happiness and--ha--privilege which I now enjoy and appreciate; secondly, the arrangement--hum--the laying out, that is to say, in the best way, of--ha, hum--my money.', 'Well, sir, if I can be of any use to you in that respect, you may command me.', 'I scarcely--ha--dared, I assure you, to hope for so--hum--vast an advantage as your direct advice and assistance. Though of course I should, under any circumstances, like the--ha, hum--rest of the civilised world, have followed in Mr Merdle', 'You know we may almost say we are related, sir, and, therefore, you may consider me at your service.', 'Ha. Very handsome, indeed! Ha. Most handsome!', 'It would not, be at the present moment easy for what I may call a mere outsider to come into any of the good things--of course I speak of my own good things--', 'Of course, of course!', '--Unless at a high price. At what we are accustomed to term a very long figure.', 'However, I do generally retain in my own hands the power of exercising some preference--people in general would be pleased to call it favour--as a sort of compliment for my care and trouble.', 'And public spirit and genius,', 'You are very good, You are _very_ good.', 'Of course, there must be the strictest integrity and uprightness in these transactions; there must be the purest faith between man and man; there must be unimpeached and unimpeachable confidence; or business could not be carried on.', 'Therefore, I can only give you a preference to a certain extent.', 'I perceive. To a defined extent,', 'Defined extent. And perfectly above-board. As to my advice, however, that is another matter. That, such as it is--', '--That, there is nothing in the bonds of spotless honour between myself and my fellow-man to prevent my parting with, if I choose. And that, shall be at your command whenever you think proper.', 'My time being rather precious, I must be moving towards the City. Can I take you anywhere, sir? I shall be happy to set you down, or send you on. My carriage is at your disposal.', 'A wonderful man to be Mr Merdle', 'Mrs Finching.', 'Man, man, explain your motive in bringing me this ridiculous name. I am wholly unacquainted with it. Finching, sir? Ha! What do you mean by Finching?', 'explain your motive in bringing me this ridiculous name. I am wholly unacquainted with it. Finching, sir? Ha! What do you mean by Finching?', 'I know no such lady, sir, Take this card away. I know no Finching of either sex.', 'Ask your pardon, sir. The lady said she was aware she might be unknown by name. But she begged me to say, sir, that she had formerly the honour of being acquainted with Miss Dorrit. The lady said, sir, the youngest Miss Dorrit.', 'I have not the pleasure, of knowing either this name, or yourself, madam. Place a chair, sir.', 'I beg Mr Dorrit to offer a thousand apologies and indeed they would be far too few for such an intrusion which I know must appear extremely bold in a lady and alone too, but I thought it best upon the whole however difficult and even apparently improper though Mr F.', 'I must openly admit that I have no pretensions, but having known the dear little thing which under altered circumstances appears a liberty but is not so intended and Goodness knows there was no favour in half-a-crown a-day to such a needle as herself but quite the other way and as to anything lowering in it far from it the labourer is worthy of his hire and I am sure I only wish he got it oftener and more animal food and less rheumatism in the back and legs poor soul.', 'Madam, madam, if I understand you to refer to--ha--to anything in the antecedents of--hum--a daughter of mine, involving--ha hum--daily compensation, madam, I beg to observe that the--ha--fact, assuming it--ha--to be fact, never was within my knowledge. Hum. I should not have permitted it. Ha. Never! Never!', 'Unnecessary to pursue the subject, and would not have mentioned it on any account except as supposing it a favourable and only letter of introduction but as to being fact no doubt whatever and you may set your mind at rest for the very dress I have on now can prove it and sweetly made though there is no denying that it would tell better on a better figure for my own is much too fat though how to bring it down I know not, pray excuse me I am roving off again.', 'The dear little thing, having gone off perfectly limp and white and cold in my own house or at least papa', 'Mr Dorrit, you are very kind in giving me permission and highly natural it seems to me that you should be kind for though more stately I perceive a likeness filled out of course but a likeness still, the object of my intruding is my own without the slightest consultation with any human being and most decidedly not with Arthur--pray excuse me Doyce and Clennam I don', 'It  said Flora,  s possible and being possible when I had the gratification of reading in the papers that you had arrived from Italy and were going back I made up my mind to try it for you might come across him or hear something of him and if so what a blessing and relief to all!', 'Allow me to ask, madam, to whom--ha--TO WHOM, you at present allude?', 'To the foreigner from Italy who disappeared in the City as no doubt you have read in the papers equally with myself, not referring to private sources by the name of Pancks from which one gathers what dreadfully ill-natured things some people are wicked enough to whisper most likely judging others by themselves and what the uneasiness and indignation of Arthur--quite unable to overcome it Doyce and Clennam--cannot fail to be.', 'Blandois! Venice! And this description! I know this gentleman. He has been in my house. He is intimately acquainted with a gentleman of good family (but in indifferent circumstances), of whom I am a--hum--patron.', 'Then my humble and pressing entreaty is the more, that in travelling back you will have the kindness to look for this foreign gentleman along all the roads and up and down all the turnings and to make inquiries for him at all the hotels and orange-trees and vineyards and volcanoes and places for he must be somewhere and why doesn s there and clear all parties up?', 'Pray, madam, who is Clennam and Co.? Ha. I see the name mentioned here, in connection with the occupation of the house which Monsieur Blandois was seen to enter: who is Clennam and Co.? Is it the individual of whom I had formerly--hum--some--ha--slight transitory knowledge, and to whom I believe you have referred? Is it--ha--that person?', 'It  replied Flora, ', 'Clennam and Co. a--hum--a mother!', 'And an old man besides,', 'But I would not detain you one moment longer, if you would have the goodness to give your promise as a gentleman that both in going back to Italy and in Italy too you would look for this Mr Blandois high and low and if you found or heard of him make him come forward for the clearing of all parties.', 'With a million thanks, and my address upon my card in case of anything to be communicated personally, I will not send my love to the dear little thing for it might not be acceptable, and indeed there is no dear little thing left in the transformation so why do it but both myself and Mr F. s death that I would learn the Organ of which I am extremely fond but of which I am ashamed to say I do not yet know a note, good evening!', 'Who is it?', 'Hi! Jeremiah!', 'you can ask anything here you think proper; there are no secrets here, sir.', 'Who is it? More inquiries. A gentleman from Italy.', 'Bring him up here!', 'Where is this missing man? Have you come to give us information where he is? I hope you have?', 'So far from it, I--hum--have come to seek information.', 'Unfortunately for us, there is none to be got here. Flintwinch, show the gentleman the handbill. Give him several to take away. Hold the light for him to read it.', 'Now you know as much, as we know, sir. Is Mr Blandois a friend of yours?', 'No--a--hum--an acquaintance,', 'You have no commission from him, perhaps?', 'I? Ha. Certainly not.', 'I am--ha--a gentleman of property, at present residing in Italy with my family, my servants, and--hum--my rather large establishment. Being in London for a short time on affairs connected with--ha--my estate, and hearing of this strange disappearance, I wished to make myself acquainted with the circumstances at first-hand, because there is--ha hum--an English gentleman in Italy whom I shall no doubt see on my return, who has been in habits of close and daily intimacy with Monsieur Blandois. Mr Henry Gowan. You may know the name.', 'Never heard of it.', 'Wishing to--ha--make the narrative coherent and consecutive to him, may I ask--say, three questions?', 'Thirty, if you choose.', 'Have you known Monsieur Blandois long?', 'Not a twelvemonth. Mr Flintwinch here, will refer to the books and tell you when, and by whom at Paris he was introduced to us. If that, should be any satisfaction to you. It is poor satisfaction to us.', 'Have you seen him often?', 'No. Twice. Once before, and--', 'That once,', 'And that once.', 'Pray, madam, pray, madam, may I inquire, for the greater satisfaction of the gentleman whom I have the honour to--ha--retain, or protect or let me say to--hum--know--to know--Was Monsieur Blandois here on business on the night indicated in this present sheet?', 'On what he called business,', 'Is--ha--excuse me--is its nature to be communicated?', 'No.', 'The question has been asked before, and the answer has been, No. We don', 'I mean, he took away no money with him, for example,', 'He took away none of ours, sir, and got none here.', 'I suppose, you have no way of accounting to yourself for this mystery?', 'Why do you suppose so?', 'I account for it, sir, s part, ', 'Do you know--ha--why he should hide anywhere?', 'No.', 'You asked me if I accounted for the disappearance to myself, not if I accounted for it to you. I do not pretend to account for it to you, sir. I understand it to be no more my business to do that, than it is yours to require that.', 'My dear, our family looks to you to--ha--assert its dignity and--hum--maintain its importance. I know you will never disappoint it.', 'No, papa, you may rely upon that, I think. My best love to dearest Amy, and I will write to her very soon.', 'Shall I convey any message to--ha--anybody else?', 'Papa, no, I thank you. You are very kind, Pa, but I must beg to be excused. There is no other message to send, I thank you, dear papa, that it would be at all agreeable to you to take.', 'Now, young man, This is the gentleman. This young man has persisted in waiting, sir, saying you would be glad to see him.', 'Yes, sir,', 'I--ha--thought it was Young John! The young man may come up, oh yes, he may come up. Let Young John follow. I will speak to him above.', 'Now, sir, What do you mean by this?', 'How dare you do this? How do you presume to come here? How dare you insult me?', 'I insult you, sir? Oh!', 'Yes, sir, Insult me. Your coming here is an affront, an impertinence, an audacity. You are not wanted here. Who sent you here? What--ha--the Devil do you do here?', 'I thought, sir, s in his life--even in his College life:  t object to have the goodness to accept a bundle--', 'Damn your bundle, sir! I--hum--don', 'I--hum--don', 'I humbly beg your pardon, sir. You used to.', 'Tell me that again, and I', 'Stop, sir! Stop! Sit down. Confound you sit down!', 'What else did you come for, Sir?', 'Nothing else in the world, sir. Oh dear me! Only to say, Sir, that I hoped you was well, and only to ask if Miss Amy was Well?', 'What', 'It s a liberty, sir, but I never thought you  said Young John, with emotion, ', 'Young John, I am very sorry to have been hasty with you, but--ha--some remembrances are not happy remembrances, and--hum--you shouldn', 'I feel that now, sir, but I didn', 'No. No, I am--hum--sure of that. Ha. Give me your hand, Young John, give me your hand.', 'There! Sit down again, Young John.', 'Thank you, sir--but I', 'And how is your father, Young John? How--ha--how are they all, Young John?', 'Thank you, sir, They re not any ways complaining.', 'Hum. You are in your--ha--old business I see, John?', 'Partly, sir. I am in my father', 'Oh indeed! Do you--ha hum--go upon the ha--', 'Lock, sir? Yes, sir.', 'Much to do, John?', 'Yes, sir; we t know how it is, but we generally _are_ pretty heavy.', 'At this time of the year, Young John?', 'Mostly at all times of the year, sir. I don', 'Stay a moment, John--ha--stay a moment. Hum. Leave me the cigars, John, I--ha--beg.', 'Certainly, sir.', 'Stay a moment, Young John; stay another moment. It would be a--ha--a gratification to me to send a little--hum--Testimonial, by such a trusty messenger, to be divided among--ha hum--them--_them_--according to their wants. Would you object to take it, John?', 'Not in any ways, sir. There m sure, that would be the better for it.', 'Thank you, John. I--ha--I', 'I hope you', 'Don t in any ways bear malice, I', 'And, John, I hope we--ha--agree that we have spoken together in confidence; and that you will abstain, in going out, from saying anything to any one that might--hum--suggest that--ha--once I--', 'Oh! I assure you, sir, in my poor humble way, sir, I', 'Do you know, uncle, I think you are growing young again?', 'I think, that you have been growing younger for weeks past. So cheerful, uncle, and so ready, and so interested.', 'My dear child--all you.', 'All me, uncle!', 'Yes, yes. You have done me a world of good. You have been so considerate of me, and so tender with me, and so delicate in trying to hide your attentions from me, that I--well, well, well! It', 'There is nothing in it but your own fresh fancy, uncle,', 'Well, well, well! Thank God!', 'I have been freer with you, you see, my dove, since we have been alone. I say, alone, for I don t care for her; she has nothing to do with me. But I know Fanny was impatient of me. And I don  said the old man admiringly,  s your father, Amy! My dear William, welcome back! My beloved brother, I am rejoiced to see you!', 'Ha. Really I am glad to find--hum--any one to receive me at last. I appear to have been--ha--so little expected, that upon my word I began--ha hum--to think it might be right to offer an apology for--ha--taking the liberty of coming back at all.', 'It was so late, my dear William, that we had given you up for to-night.', 'I am stronger than you, dear Frederick, and I hope I can travel without detriment at--ha--any hour I choose.', 'Surely, surely, Surely, William.', 'Thank you, Amy, I can do it without assistance. I--ha--need not trouble you, Amy. Could I have a morsel of bread and a glass of wine, or--hum--would it cause too much inconvenience?', 'Dear father, you shall have supper in a very few minutes.', 'Thank you, my love, I--ha--am afraid I am causing inconvenience. Hum. Mrs General pretty well?', 'I--ha--am afraid I am causing inconvenience. Hum. Mrs General pretty well?', 'Mrs General complained of a headache, and of being fatigued; and so, when we gave you up, she went to bed, dear.', 'Amy, what are you looking at? What do you see in me that causes you to--ha--concentrate your solicitude on me in that--hum--very particular manner?', 'I did not know it, father; I beg your pardon. It gladdens my eyes to see you again; that', 'Don s all, because--ha--that  said Mr Dorrit, with an accusatory emphasis, ', 'I thought you looked a little tired, love.', 'Then you are mistaken, Ha, I am _not_ tired. Ha, hum. I am very much fresher than I was when I went away.', 'Frederick, I recommend you to go to bed immediately.', 'No, William. I', 'Frederick, I beg you to go to bed. I--ha--make it a personal request that you go to bed. You ought to have been in bed long ago. You are very feeble.', 'Hah! Well, well, well! I dare say I am.', 'My dear Frederick, s failing powers,  t find you looking at all well. You are not fit for this sort of thing. You should be more careful, you should be very careful.', 'Shall I go to bed?', 'Dear Frederick, do, I adjure you! Good night, brother. I hope you will be stronger to-morrow. I am not at all pleased with your looks. Good night, dear fellow.', 'Your uncle wanders very much, Amy, He is less--ha--coherent, and his conversation is more--hum--broken, than I have--ha, hum--ever known. Has he had any illness since I have been gone?', 'He is less--ha--coherent, and his conversation is more--hum--broken, than I have--ha, hum--ever known. Has he had any illness since I have been gone?', 'No, father.', 'You--ha--see a great change in him, Amy?', 'I have not observed it, dear.', 'Greatly broken, Greatly broken. My poor, affectionate, failing Frederick! Ha. Even taking into account what he was before, he is--hum--sadly broken!', 'She is very well. She is going away next week.', 'Home?', 'After a few weeks', 'She will be a vast loss here, A vast--ha--acquisition at home. To Fanny, and to--hum--the rest of the--ha--great world.', 'Mrs Merdle is going to have a great farewell Assembly, dear, and a dinner before it. She has been expressing her anxiety that you should return in time. She has invited both you and me to her dinner.', 'She is--ha--very kind. When is the day?', 'The day after to-morrow.', 'Write round in the morning, and say that I have returned, and shall--hum--be delighted.', 'May I walk with you up the stairs to your room, dear?', 'No! You may not, Amy. I want no help. I am your father, not your infirm uncle! You have not kissed me, Amy. Good night, my dear! We must marry--ha--we must marry _you_, now.', 'but--ha, hum--broken up altogether. Unhappily, declining fast.', 'Mr Frederick, sir, is habitually absent and drooping, but let us hope it is not so bad as that.', 'You left Mrs Sparkler quite well and happy, I trust?', 'Surrounded, by--ha--all that can charm the taste, and--hum--elevate the mind. Happy, my dear madam, in a--hum--husband.', 'Fanny, Fanny, Mrs General, has high qualities. Ha. Ambition--hum--purpose, consciousness of--ha--position, determination to support that position--ha, hum--grace, beauty, and native nobility.', 'No doubt,', 'Combined with these qualities, madam, Fanny has--ha--manifested one blemish which has made me--hum--made me uneasy, and--ha--I must add, angry; but which I trust may now be considered at an end, even as to herself, and which is undoubtedly at an end as to--ha--others.', 'To what, Mr Dorrit, can you allude? I am at a loss to--', 'Do not say that, my dear madam,', 'I refer, Mrs General, to that--ha--strong spirit of opposition, or--hum--I might say--ha--jealousy in Fanny, which has occasionally risen against the--ha--sense I entertain of--hum--the claims of--ha--the lady with whom I have now the honour of communing.', 'Mr Dorrit, is ever but too obliging, ever but too appreciative. If there have been moments when I have imagined that Miss Dorrit has indeed resented the favourable opinion Mr Dorrit has formed of my services, I have found, in that only too high opinion, my consolation and recompense.', 'Opinion of your services, madam?', 'Of, my services.', 'Of your services alone, dear madam?', 'I presume, of my services alone. For, to what else, could I impute--', 'To--ha--yourself, Mrs General. Ha, hum. To yourself and your merits,', 'Mr Dorrit will pardon me, if I remark that this is not a time or place for the pursuit of the present conversation. Mr Dorrit will excuse me if I remind him that Miss Dorrit is in the adjoining room, and is visible to myself while I utter her name. Mr Dorrit will forgive me if I observe that I am agitated, and that I find there are moments when weaknesses I supposed myself to have subdued, return with redoubled power. Mr Dorrit will allow me to withdraw.', 'Hum. Perhaps we may resume this--ha--interesting conversation, at another time; unless it should be, what I hope it is not--hum--in any way disagreeable to--ah--Mrs General.', 'Mr Dorrit, must ever claim my homage and obedience.', 'Amy, Amy, my child!', 'Amy, my dear, Will you go and see if Bob is on the lock?', 'Amy, Amy. I don t know what s as much my friend as yours. See if Bob is in the lodge, and beg him to come to me.', 'Dear father, I am not there; I am here, by you.', 'Oh! You are here, Amy! Good. Hum. Good. Ha. Call Bob. If he has been relieved, and is not on the lock, tell Mrs Bangham to go and fetch him.', 'I tell you, child, I can', 'Ladies and gentlemen, the duty--ha--devolves upon me of--hum--welcoming you to the Marshalsea! Welcome to the Marshalsea! The space is--ha--limited--limited--the parade might be wider; but you will find it apparently grow larger after a time--a time, ladies and gentlemen--and the air is, all things considered, very good. It blows over the--ha--Surrey hills. Blows over the Surrey hills. This is the Snuggery. Hum. Supported by a small subscription of the--ha--Collegiate body. In return for which--hot water--general kitchen--and little domestic advantages. Those who are habituated to the--ha--Marshalsea, are pleased to call me its father. I am accustomed to be complimented by strangers as the--ha--Father of the Marshalsea. Certainly, if years of residence may establish a claim to so--ha--honourable a title, I may accept the--hum--conferred distinction. My child, ladies and gentlemen. My daughter. Born here!', 'Born here, Bred here. Ladies and gentlemen, my daughter. Child of an unfortunate father, but--ha--always a gentleman. Poor, no doubt, but--hum--proud. Always proud. It has become a--hum--not infrequent custom for my--ha--personal admirers--personal admirers solely--to be pleased to express their desire to acknowledge my semi-official position here, by offering--ha--little tributes, which usually take the form of--ha--voluntary recognitions of my humble endeavours to--hum--to uphold a Tone here--a Tone--I beg it to be understood that I do not consider myself compromised. Ha. Not compromised. Ha. Not a beggar. No; I repudiate the title! At the same time far be it from me to--hum--to put upon the fine feelings by which my partial friends are actuated, the slight of scrupling to admit that those offerings are--hum--highly acceptable. On the contrary, they are most acceptable. In my child', 'Uncle, dear uncle, spare yourself, spare me!', 'O God, Thou seest this daughter of my dear dead brother! All that I have looked upon, with my half-blind and sinful eyes, Thou hast discerned clearly, brightly. Not a hair of her head shall be harmed before Thee. Thou wilt uphold her here to her last hour. And I know Thou wilt reward her hereafter!', 'So Pancks said, I suppose his information to be correct and his discovery, among Mr Casby', 'Monsieur Blandois,', 'With pleasure, Monsieur.', 'Pardon me, Miss Wade. I am alone.', 'It was not your name that was brought to me.', 'No; I know that. Excuse me. I have already had experience that my name does not predispose you to an interview; and I ventured to mention the name of one I am in search of.', 'Pray, what name was it that you gave?', 'I mentioned the name of Blandois.', 'Blandois?', 'A name you are acquainted with.', 'It is strange, that you should still press an undesired interest in me and my acquaintances, in me and my affairs, Mr Clennam. I don', 'Pardon me. You know the name?', 'What can you have to do with the name? What can I have to do with the name? What can you have to do with my knowing or not knowing any name? I know many names and I have forgotten many more. This may be in the one class, or it may be in the other, or I may never have heard it. I am acquainted with no reason for examining myself, or for being examined, about it.', 'If you will allow me, I will tell you my reason for pressing the subject. I admit that I do press it, and I must beg you to forgive me if I do so, very earnestly. The reason is all mine, I do not insinuate that it is in any way yours.', 'Well, sir, I am at least glad to know that this is not another bondswoman of some friend of yours, who is bereft of free choice, and whom I have spirited away. I will hear your reason, if you please.', 'First, to identify the person of whom we speak, let me observe that it is the person you met in London some time back. You will remember meeting him near the river--in the Adelphi!', 'You mix yourself most unaccountably with my business, How do you know that?', 'I entreat you not to take it ill. By mere accident.', 'What accident?', 'Solely the accident of coming upon you in the street and seeing the meeting.', 'Do you speak of yourself, or of some one else?', 'Of myself. I saw it.', 'To be sure it was in the open street, Fifty people might have seen it. It would have signified nothing if they had.', 'Nor do I make my having seen it of any moment, nor (otherwise than as an explanation of my coming here) do I connect my visit with it or the favour that I have to ask.', 'Oh! You have to ask a favour! It occurred to me, that your manner was softened, Mr Clennam.', 'You have not yet told me, sir, what I have to do with it, or what the favour is? Will you be so good as come to that?', 'I assume, that being in communication--may I say, confidential communication?--with this person--', 'You may say, of course, whatever you like, but I do not subscribe to your assumptions, Mr Clennam, or to any one', '--that being, at least in personal communication with him, you can tell me something of his antecedents, pursuits, habits, usual place of residence. Can give me some little clue by which to seek him out in the likeliest manner, and either produce him, or establish what has become of him. This is the favour I ask, and I ask it in a distress of mind for which I hope you will feel some consideration. If you should have any reason for imposing conditions upon me, I will respect it without asking what it is.', 'You chanced to see me in the street with the man, Then you knew the man before?', 'Not before; afterwards. I never saw him before, but I saw him again on this very night of his disappearance. In my mother', 'This is more than _I_ knew of him, s looks expressed his heavy disappointment, perhaps his incredulity; for she added in the same unsympathetic tone:  t believe it. Still, it is so. As to personal communication: it seems that there was personal communication between him and your mother. And yet you say you believe _her_ declaration that she knows no more of him!', 'Come, sir, I will be as open with you as you can desire. I will confess that if I cared for my credit (which I do not), or had a good name to preserve (which I have not, for I am utterly indifferent to its being considered good or bad), I should regard myself as heavily compromised by having had anything to do with this fellow. Yet he never passed in at _my_ door--never sat in colloquy with _me_ until midnight.', 'That he is a low, mercenary wretch; that I first saw him prowling about Italy (where I was, not long ago), and that I hired him there, as the suitable instrument of a purpose I happened to have; I have no objection to tell you. In short, it was worth my while, for my own pleasure--the gratification of a strong feeling--to pay a spy who would fetch and carry for money. I paid this creature. And I dare say that if I had wanted to make such a bargain, and if I could have paid him enough, and if he could have done it in the dark, free from all risk, he would have taken any life with as little scruple as he took my money. That, at least, is my opinion of him; and I see it is not very far removed from yours. Your mother', 'My mother, let me remind you, was first brought into communication with him in the unlucky course of business.', 'It appears to have been an unlucky course of business that last brought her into communication with him, and business hours on that occasion were late.', 'You imply, that there was something--', 'Mr Clennam, recollect that I do not speak by implication about the man. He is, I say again without disguise, a low mercenary wretch. I suppose such a creature goes where there is occasion for him. If I had not had occasion for him, you would not have seen him and me together.', 'I have spoken of him as still living, but he may have been put out of the way for anything I know. For anything I care, also. I have no further occasion for him.', 'He was the chosen associate of your dear friend, Mr Gowan, was he not? Why don', 'Further than that he has never seen Blandois since Blandois set out for England, Mr Gowan knows nothing additional about him. He was a chance acquaintance, made abroad.', 'A chance acquaintance made abroad! Yes. Your dear friend has need to divert himself with all the acquaintances he can make, seeing what a wife he has. I hate his wife, sir.', 'All I will say is, Miss Wade, that you can have received no provocation to a feeling in which I believe you have no sharer.', 'You may ask your dear friend, if you choose, for his opinion upon that subject.', 'I am scarcely on those intimate terms with my dear friend, that would render my approaching the subject very probable, Miss Wade.', 'I hate him, Worse than his wife, because I was once dupe enough, and false enough to myself, almost to love him. You have seen me, sir, only on common-place occasions, when I dare say you have thought me a common-place woman, a little more self-willed than the generality. You don t know, without knowing with what care I have studied myself and people about me. For this reason I have for some time inclined to tell you what my life has been--not to propitiate your opinion, for I set no value on it; but that you may comprehend, when you think of your dear friend and his dear wife, what I mean by hating. Shall I give you something I have written and put by for your perusal, or shall I hold my hand?', 'Now you may know what I mean by hating! No more of that. Sir, whether you find me temporarily and cheaply lodging in an empty London house, or in a Calais apartment, you find Harriet with me. You may like to see her before you leave. Harriet, come in!', 'Here is Mr Clennam, not come for you; he has given you up,--I suppose you have, by this time?', 'Having no authority, or influence--yes,', 'Not come in search of you, you see; but still seeking some one. He wants that Blandois man.', 'With whom I saw you in the Strand in London,', 'If you know anything of him, Harriet, except that he came from Venice--which we all know--tell it to Mr Clennam freely.', 'I know nothing more about him,', 'Are you satisfied?', 'Are they well, sir?', 'Who?', 'They were, when I last heard of them. They are not at home. By the way, let me ask you. Is it true that you were seen there?', 'Where? Where does any one say I was seen?', 'Looking in at the garden gate of the cottage.', 'No, She has never been near it.', 'You are wrong, then, I went down there the last time we were in London. I went one afternoon when you left me alone. And I did look in.', 'You poor-spirited girl, does all our companionship, do all our conversations, do all your old complainings, tell for so little as that?', 'does all our companionship, do all our conversations, do all your old complainings, tell for so little as that?', 'There was no harm in looking in at the gate for an instant, I saw by the windows that the family were not there.', 'Why should you go near the place?', 'Because I wanted to see it. Because I felt that I should like to look at it again.', 'Oh! if you had any desire to see the place where you led the life from which I rescued you because you had found out what it was, that is another thing. But is that your truth to me? Is that your fidelity to me? Is that the common cause I make with you? You are not worth the confidence I have placed in you. You are not worth the favour I have shown you. You are no higher than a spaniel, and had better go back to the people who did worse than whip you.', 'If you speak so of them with any one else by to hear, you', 'Go back to them, Go back to them.', 'You know very well, that I won', 'You prefer their plenty to your less fat living here, You exalt them, and slight me. What else should I have expected? I ought to have known it.', 'You exalt them, and slight me. What else should I have expected? I ought to have known it.', 'It  said the girl, flushing high,  t say what you mean. I know what you mean. You are reproaching me, underhanded, with having nobody but you to look to. And because I have nobody but you to look to, you think you are to make me do, or not do, everything you please, and are to put any affront upon me. You are as bad as they were, every bit. But I will not be quite tamed, and made submissive. I will say again that I went to look at the house, because I had often thought that I should like to see it once more. I will ask again how they are, because I once liked them and at times thought they were kind to me.', 'Never! I shall never do that. Nobody knows that better than Miss Wade, though she taunts me because she has made me her dependent. And I know I am so; and I know she is overjoyed when she can bring it to my mind.', 'A good pretence! but too threadbare to cover what I plainly see in this. My poverty will not bear competition with their money. Better go back at once, better go back at once, and have done with it!', 'Miss Wade! Poor Dawes is devoted to you; would do anything for you!', 'I hope, Miss Wade, that nothing I have ever said or done since we have been together, has justified your use of that disagreeable word, "Mistress." It must have been wholly inadvertent on my part. Pray tell me what it is.', 'Miss Wade, I fear you are unhappy, through causes over which I have no influence.', 'I did not say that.', 'It is an easy way of accounting for anything,', 'It may be; but I did not say so. What I wish to approach is something very different. My husband and I have exchanged some remarks upon the subject, when we have observed with pain that you have not been easy with us.', 'Easy? Oh! You are such great people, my lady,', 'I am unfortunate in using a word which may convey a meaning--and evidently does--quite opposite to my intention. I only mean, not happy with us. It is a difficult topic to enter on; but, from one young woman to another, perhaps--in short, we have been apprehensive that you may allow some family circumstances of which no one can be more innocent than yourself, to prey upon your spirits. If so, let us entreat you not to make them a cause of grief. My husband himself, as is well known, formerly had a very dear sister who was not in law his sister, but who was universally beloved and respected--', 'faithful swain the most loving young fellow in the world, with the tenderest heart that ever beat,', 'It', 'I am glad you approve, Doyce. Now, as to the management of your capital while you are away, and as to the conversion of so much of it as the business may need from time to time--', 'As to that, and as to everything else of that kind, all rests with you. You will continue in all such matters to act for both of us, as you have done hitherto, and to lighten my mind of a load it is much relieved from.', 'Though, as I often tell you, you unreasonably depreciate your business qualities.', 'Perhaps so, And perhaps not. Anyhow, I have a calling that I have studied more than such matters, and that I am better fitted for. I have perfect confidence in my partner, and I am satisfied that he will do what is best. If I have a prejudice connected with money and money figures, s thumb of his on the lapel of his partner it is against speculating. I don', 'But you shouldn  said Clennam. ', 'I am glad you think so,', 'It so happens, that just now, not half an hour before you came down, I was saying the same thing to Pancks, who looked in here. We both agreed that to travel out of safe investments is one of the most dangerous, as it is one of the most common, of those follies which often deserve the name of vices.', 'Pancks? Aye, aye, aye! That', 'He is a very cautious fellow indeed, Quite a specimen of caution.', 'And now, as time and tide wait for no man, my trusty partner, and as I am ready for starting, bag and baggage, at the gate below, let me say a last word. I want you to grant a request of mine.', 'Any request you can make--Except, s face was quick in suggesting it, ', 'That', 'I say, No, then. I say positively, No. Now that I have begun, I will have some definite reason, some responsible statement, something in the nature of a real answer, from those people.', 'You will not, Take my word for it, you never will.', 'At least, I  said Clennam. ', 'I am not certain of that, It has done me harm, my friend. It has aged me, tired me, vexed me, disappointed me. It does no man any good to have his patience worn out, and to think himself ill-used. I fancy, even already, that unavailing attendance on delays and evasions has made you something less elastic than you used to be.', 'Private anxieties may have done that for the moment, but not official harrying. Not yet. I am not hurt yet.', 'but not official harrying. Not yet. I am not hurt yet.', 'Then you won', 'Decidedly, No, I should be ashamed if I submitted to be so soon driven out of the field, where a much older and a much more sensitively interested man contended with fortitude so long.', 'Ah! You know the song, Cavalletto?', 'By Bacchus, yes, sir! They all know it in France. I have heard it many times, sung by the little children. The last time when it I have heard, is from a sweet little voice. A little voice, very pretty, very innocent. Altro!', 'The last time I heard it, was in a voice quite the reverse of pretty, and quite the reverse of innocent. s next words.  s my character to be impatient!', 'EH!', 'What is the matter?', 'Sir! You know where I have heard that song the last time?', 'In the name of Fate and wonder, what do you mean? Do you know a man of the name of Blandois?', 'No!', 'You have just now described a man who was by when you heard that song; have you not?', 'Yes!', 'And was he not called Blandois?', 'No! Altro, Altro, Altro, Altro!', 'Stay! Was this the man? You can understand what I read aloud?', 'Altogether. Perfectly.', 'But look at it, too. Come here and look over me, while I read.', 'This is of far greater moment to me than you can imagine. Tell me where you knew the man.', 'than you can imagine. Tell me where you knew the man.', 'At Marsiglia--Marseilles.', 'What was he?', 'A prisoner, and--Altro! I believe yes!--an, Assassin!', 'Listen, This man, as we have read here, has wholly disappeared.', 'Of it I am well content! A thousand thanks to Heaven! Accursed assassin!', 'Not so, for until something more is heard of him, I can never know an hour', 'Enough, Benefactor; that is quite another thing. A million of excuses!', 'Now, Cavalletto, s eyes. ', 'I swear it!', 'I know it. If you could find this man, or discover what has become of him, or gain any later intelligence whatever of him, you would render me a service above any other service I could receive in the world, and would make me (with far greater reason) as grateful to you as you are to me.', 'I know not where to look, s hand in a transport. ', 'Not a word to any one but me, Cavalletto.', 'Al-tro!', 'Good evening,', 'Good evening,', 'Have you any news?', 'We have no news,', 'I mean of the foreign man,', '_I_ mean of the foreign man,', 'You', 'that I lose myself.', 'Hah! Yet I don  returned Mr Flintwinch, quite at his leisure, ', 'why it should trouble _you_, Arthur.', 'No?', 'No,', 'Is it nothing to see those placards about? Is it nothing to me to see my mother', 'I don  returned Mr Flintwinch, scraping his horny cheek,  ll tell you what I do see, Arthur, I see the light of fire and candle in your mother', 'And what has that to do with it?', 'Why, sir, I read by it, that if it s just as advisable, perhaps, to let missing dogs lie. Let ', 'that if it s just as advisable, perhaps, to let missing dogs lie. Let ', 'Now, sir, will it be agreeable to walk up-stairs?', 'My mother is alone, I suppose?', 'Not alone, Mr Casby and his daughter are with her. They came in while I was smoking, and I stayed behind to have my smoke out.', 'Mother, I have heard something to-day which I feel persuaded you don', 'I know nothing of the antecedents of the man you saw here, Arthur.', 'I have received it on no circuitous information; it has come to me direct.', 'I thought it right that you should know it.', 'And what is it?', 'He has been a prisoner in a French gaol.', 'But in a gaol for criminals, mother. On an accusation of murder.', 'Who told you so?', 'A man who was his fellow-prisoner.', 'That man', 'No.', 'Though the man himself was?', 'Yes.', 'My case and Flintwinch', 'Mother, shall I do nothing to assist you?', 'Nothing.', 'Will you entrust me with no confidence, no charge, no explanation? Will you take no counsel with me? Will you not let me come near you?', 'How can you ask me? You separated yourself from my affairs. It was not my act; it was yours. How can you consistently ask me such a question? You know that you left me to Flintwinch, and that he occupies your place.', 'A prisoner, in a French gaol, on an accusation of murder, That is all you know of him from the fellow-prisoner?', 'In substance, all.', 'And was the fellow-prisoner his accomplice and a murderer, too? But, of course, he gives a better account of himself than of his friend; it is needless to ask. This will supply the rest of them here with something new to talk about. Casby, Arthur tells me--', 'Stay, mother! Stay, stay!', 'What now? What more?', 'I beg you to excuse me, Mr Casby--and you, too, Mrs Finching--for one other moment with my mother--', 'What now? What is it?', 'I did not mean, mother, that you should repeat what I have communicated. I think you had better not repeat it.', 'Do you make that a condition with me?', 'Well! Yes.', 'Observe, then! It is you who make this a secret, and not I. It is you, Arthur, who bring here doubts and suspicions and entreaties for explanations, and it is you, Arthur, who bring secrets here. What is it to me, do you think, where the man has been, or what he has been? What can it be to me? The whole world may know it, if they care to know it; it is nothing to me. Now, let me go.', 'Could you say you would like to go through the house?', 'Ah dear me the poor old room, looks just as ever Mrs Clennam I am touched to see except for being smokier which was to be expected with time and which we must all expect and reconcile ourselves to being whether we like it or not as I am sure I have had to do myself if not exactly smokier dreadfully stouter which is the same or worse, to think of the days when papa used to bring me here the least of girls a perfect mass of chilblains to be stuck upon a chair with my feet on the rails and stare at Arthur--pray excuse me--Mr Clennam--the least of boys in the frightfullest of frills and jackets ere yet Mr F. appeared a misty shadow on the horizon paying attentions like the well-known spectre of some place in Germany beginning with a B is a moral lesson inculcating that all the paths in life are similar to the paths down in the North of England where they get the coals and make the iron and things gravelled with ashes!', 'Not that at any time, its worst enemy could have said it was a cheerful house for that it was never made to be but always highly impressive, fond memory recalls an occasion in youth ere yet the judgment was mature when Arthur--confirmed habit--Mr Clennam--took me down into an unused kitchen eminent for mouldiness and proposed to secrete me there for life and feed me on what he could hide from his meals when he was not at home for the holidays and on dry bread in disgrace which at that halcyon period too frequently occurred, would it be inconvenient or asking too much to beg to be permitted to revive those scenes and walk through the house?', 'and Affery will light us, I dare say.', 'Go before, you fool! Are you going up, or down, Mrs Finching?', 'Then go before, and down, you Affery, And do it properly, or I', 'What? You want another dose! You shall have it, my woman, you shall have a good one! Oh! You shall have a sneezer, you shall have a teaser!', 'In the meantime is anybody going to the door?', 'In the meantime, _I_ am going to the door, sir, Stay here the while, all! Affery, my woman, move an inch, or speak a word in your foolishness, and I', 'Affery, speak to me now!', 'Don  she cried, shrinking from him.  t come near me. He t.', 'He can  returned Arthur, suiting the action to the word, ', 'He', 'He can  returned Arthur, suiting the action to the words again, ', 'Because I am afraid of seeing something.', 'You can', 'Yes I am. Much more than if it was light.', 'Why are you afraid?', 'Because the house is full of mysteries and secrets; because it s full of noises. There never was such a house for noises. I shall die of  t strangle me first. As I expect he will.', 'I have never heard any noises here, worth speaking of.', 'Ah! But you would, though, if you lived in the house, and was obliged to go about it as I am, and you d feel you was nigh bursting through not being allowed to speak of  s Jeremiah! You', 'My good Affery, I solemnly declare to you that I can see the light of the open door on the pavement of the hall, and so could you if you would uncover your face and look.', 'I durstn  said Affery,  t never, Arthur. I t a looking, and sometimes even when he is.', 'He cannot shut the door without my seeing him, You are as safe with me as if he was fifty miles away.', 'Affery, I want to know what is amiss here; I want some light thrown on the secrets of this house.', 'I tell you, Arthur, noises is the secrets, rustlings and stealings about, tremblings, treads overhead and treads underneath.', 'But those are not all the secrets.', 'I don  said Affery.  t ask me no more. Your old sweetheart an s a blabber.', 'I make an imploring appeal to you, Affery, to you, one of the few agreeable early remembrances I have, for my mother s sake, for my own, for all our sakes. I am sure you can tell me something connected with the coming here of this man, if you will.', 'Why, then I  returned Affery-- s coming!', 'No, indeed he is not. The door is open, and he is standing outside, talking.', 'I  said Affery, after listening,  s that?" he said to me. "I don', 'Has he been here often?', 'Only that night, and the last night.', 'What did you see of him on the last night, after I was gone?', 'Them two clever ones had him all alone to themselves. Jeremiah come a dancing at me sideways, after I had let you out (he always comes a dancing at me sideways when he s what he calls running me up, he do. Oh, he', 's what he calls running me up, he do. Oh, he', 'And did you hear or see no more, Affery?', 'Don', 'I assure you he is still at the door. Those whisperings and counsellings, Affery, that you have spoken of. What are they?', 'How should I know? Don em, Arthur. Get away!', 'But my dear Affery; unless I can gain some insight into these hidden things, in spite of your husband and in spite of my mother, ruin will come of it.', 'Don  repeated Affery. ', 'You said that before, You used the same expression that night, at the door, when I asked you what was going on here. What do you mean by being in a dream?', 'I an t tell you, if you was by yourself; much less with your old sweetheart here.', 'I ll call out to him, Arthur, if you don s the very last word I t been a living here long years, to be made afeared of your life as I have), then do you get the better of  ll tell ', 'So you have been seeing the premises, seeing the premises--premises-- seeing the premises!', 'It  said Mrs Sparkler, changing her position fretfully.  t you say it?', 'Good gracious, Edmund! you are absolutely putting mignonette up your nose! Pray don', 'You make my head ache by remaining in that position, Edmund, you look so aggravatingly large by this light. Do sit down.', 'Certainly, my dear,', 'If I didn  said Fanny, yawning in a dreary manner, ', 'Is that your fan, my love?', 'Edmund, don', 'Yes, I thought it was yours,', 'Then you shouldn  retorted Fanny. After a little while she turned on her sofa and exclaimed, ', 'My dear, I think you must have got the fidgets.', 'Oh, Fidgets! Don', 'My adorable girl,', 'Good Gracious! It', 'Now Edmund, come here! Come a little nearer, because I want to be able to touch you with my fan, that I may impress you very much with what I am going to say. That will do. Quite close enough. Oh, you _do_ look so big!', 'You ought to have told me so before,', 'My dear, I didn', 'There! For goodness sake, don  said Fanny; ', 'My dear, being as you are well known to be, a remarkably fine woman with no--', 'Oh, good GRACIOUS!', 'I mean, my dear, that everybody knows you are calculated to shine in society.', 'Calculated to shine in society, yes, indeed! And then what happens? I no sooner recover, in a visiting point of view, the shock of poor dear papa s--though I do not disguise from myself that the last was a happy release, for, if you are not presentable you had much better die--', 'You are not referring to me, my love, I hope?', 'Edmund, Edmund, you would wear out a Saint. Am I not expressly speaking of my poor uncle?', 'You looked with so much expression at myself, my dear girl, that I felt a little uncomfortable. Thank you, my love.', 'Now you have put me out, and I had better go to bed.', 'Don  urged Mr Sparkler. ', 'What happens then, I ask! What happens? Why, I find myself at the very period when I might shine most in society, and should most like for very momentous reasons to shine in society--I find myself in a situation which to a certain extent disqualifies me for going into society. It', 'My dear, I don', 'Edmund, you ridiculous creature, do you suppose that a woman in the bloom of youth and not wholly devoid of personal attractions, can put herself, at such a time, in competition as to figure with a woman in every other way her inferior? If you do suppose such a thing, your folly is boundless.', 'Got over!', 'For a time,', 'However, provoking as it is, and cruel as it seems, I suppose it must be submitted to.', 'Especially as it was to be expected,', 'Edmund, if you have nothing more becoming to do than to attempt to insult the woman who has honoured you with her hand, when she finds herself in adversity, I think _you_ had better go to bed!', 'Now, Edmund, s length, ', 'Dearest Amy, yes! Darling little thing! Not, however, that Amy would do here alone.', 'Darling little thing! Not, however, that Amy would do here alone.', 'No, Edmund. For not only are the virtues of the precious child of that still character that they require a contrast--require life and movement around them to bring them out in their right colours and make one love them of all things; but she will require to be roused, on more accounts than one.', 'That  said Mr Sparkler. ', 'Pray don', 'From the effects of that trying time, my good little Mouse will have to be roused. Also, from the effects of this long attendance upon Edward in his illness; an attendance which is not yet over, which may even go on for some time longer, and which in the meanwhile unsettles us all by keeping poor dear papa', 'He couldn', 'For a wonder, I can agree with you, and can adopt your words. He couldn', 'If Bout, Edmund, is the slang term for indisposition, he has. If it is not, I am unable to give an opinion on the barbarous language you address to Edward', 'So, Amy, will require to be roused from the effects of many tedious and anxious weeks. And lastly, she will require to be roused from a low tendency which I know very well to be at the bottom of her heart. Don', 'I am not going to, my dear,', 'I shall thus have much improvement to effect in my sweet child, and cannot have her near me too soon. Amiable and dear little Twoshoes! As to the settlement of poor papa', 'It is a highly encouraging circumstance in Edward s death at all events--that he paid off Mrs General instantly, and sent her out of the house. I applaud him for it. I could forgive him a great deal for doing, with such promptitude, so exactly what I would have done myself!', 'Halloa! Who', 'Not Amy and Edward without notice and without a carriage! Look out.', 'It  said Mr Sparkler.  t see who--stop though!', 'Candles!', 'It', 'Well, I haven', 'Of course you have dined?', 'Why--no, I haven', 'Flattering to us, for you are not a calling man.', 'No--no, No, I am not a calling man.', 'You have too much to do for that, Having so much to do, Mr Merdle, loss of appetite is a serious thing with you, and you must have it seen to. You must not be ill.', 'Oh! I am very well, I am as well as I usually am. I am well enough. I am as well as I want to be.', 'I was speaking of poor papa when you came in, sir.', 'Aye! Quite a coincidence,', 'Yes, yes. There has been a delay.', 'Not that it is of consequence,', 'Not, not that it is of any consequence.', 'My only anxiety is, that Mrs General should not get anything.', '_She_ won', 'No, I shall go by the shortest way, and leave Mrs Merdle to-- to take care of herself. I dare say she', 'Probably,', 'But, however, I am equally detaining you and myself. I thought I', 'Charmed, I am sure,', 'So I am off, Could you lend me a penknife?', 'Edmund, open (now, very carefully, I beg and beseech, for you are so very awkward) the mother of pearl box on my little table there, and give Mr Merdle the mother of pearl penknife.', 'Thank you, but if you have got one with a darker handle, I think I should prefer one with a darker handle.', 'Tortoise-shell?', 'Thank you, yes. I think I should prefer tortoise-shell.', 'I will forgive you, if you ink it.', 'I', 'A certain bird, has been whispering among us lawyers lately, that there is to be an addition to the titled personages of this realm.', 'Really?', 'Yes, Has not the bird been whispering in very different ears from ours--in lovely ears?', 'Do you mean mine?', 'When I say lovely, I always mean you.', 'You never mean anything, I think,', 'Oh, cruelly unjust! But, the bird.', 'I am the last person in the world to hear news, Who is it?', 'What an admirable witness you would make! No jury (unless we could empanel one of blind men) could resist you, if you were ever so bad a one; but you would be such a good one!', 'Why, you ridiculous man?', 'What am I to call the most elegant, accomplished and charming of women, a few weeks, or it may be a few days, hence?', 'Didn  answered Mrs Merdle. ', 'May I ask, is this true about Merdle?', 'My dear doctor, you ask me the very question that I was half disposed to ask you.', 'To ask me! Why me?', 'Upon my honour, I think Mr Merdle reposes greater confidence in you than in any one.', 'On the contrary, he tells me absolutely nothing, even professionally. You have heard the talk, of course?', 'Of course I have. But you know what Mr Merdle is; you know how taciturn and reserved he is. I assure you I have no idea what foundation for it there may be. I should like it to be true; why should I deny that to you? You would know better, if I did!', 'Just so,', 'But whether it is all true, or partly true, or entirely false, I am wholly unable to say. It is a most provoking situation, a most absurd situation; but you know Mr Merdle, and are not surprised.', 'I come from the warm-baths, sir, round in the neighbouring street.', 'And what is the matter at the warm-baths?', 'Would you please to come directly, sir. We found that, lying on the table.', 'Separation of jugular vein--death rapid--been dead at least half an hour.', 'You asked me once what Merdle', 'Extraordinary answer! I know I did.', 'I told you I had not found out.', 'Yes. I know you did.', 'I have found it out.', 'My God! s breast. ', 'Mrs Merdle', 'Mr Merdle is dead.', 'I should wish, to give a month', 'Mr Merdle has destroyed himself.', 'Sir, that is very unpleasant to the feelings of one in my position, as calculated to awaken prejudice; and I should wish to leave immediately.', 'If you are not shocked, are you not surprised, man?', 'Sir, Mr Merdle never was the gentleman, and no ungentlemanly act on Mr Merdle', 'I persuaded you to it, Mr Clennam. I know it. Say what you will. You can t say more than I deserve.', 'O, Pancks, Pancks! don', 'Better luck,', 'I, who have ruined my partner! Pancks, Pancks, I have ruined Doyce! The honest, self-helpful, indefatigable old man who has worked his way all through his life; the man who has contended against so much disappointment, and who has brought out of it such a good and hopeful nature; the man I have felt so much for, and meant to be so true and useful to; I have ruined him--brought him to shame and disgrace--ruined him, ruined him!', 'Reproach me! Reproach me, sir, or I', 'If you had never yielded to this fatal mania, Pancks, it would have been how much better for you, and how much better for me!', 'At me again, sir! At me again!', 'If you had never gone into those accursed calculations, and brought out your results with such abominable clearness, it would have been how much better for you, Pancks, and how much better for me!', 'At me again, sir! at me again, and again!', 'at me again, and again!', 'Not been to bed, sir, since it began to get about. Been high and low, on the chance of finding some hope of saving any cinders from the fire. All in vain. All gone. All vanished.', 'I know it, too well.', 'Only yesterday, Pancks, only yesterday, Monday, I had the fixed intention of selling, realising, and making an end of it.', 'I can  returned Pancks.  s wonderful how many people I t been too late!', 'Mr Clennam, had you laid out--everything?', 'Everything.', 'My course, must be taken at once. What wretched amends I can make must be made. I must clear my unfortunate partner', 'Is it impossible, sir, to tide over the present?', 'Out of the question. Nothing can be tided over now, Pancks. The sooner the business can pass out of my hands, the better for it. There are engagements to be met, this week, which would bring the catastrophe before many days were over, even if I would postpone it for a single day by going on for that space, secretly knowing what I know. All last night I thought of what I would do; what remains is to do it.', 'Not entirely of yourself? Have some legal help.', 'Have some legal help.', 'Perhaps I had better.', 'Have Rugg.', 'There is not much to do. He will do it as well as another.', 'Shall I fetch Rugg, Mr Clennam?', 'If you could spare the time, I should be much obliged to you.', 'He is not unlike what my daughter was, sir, when we began the Breach of Promise action of Rugg and Bawkins, in which she was Plaintiff, He takes too strong and direct an interest in the case. His feelings are worked upon. There is no getting on, in our profession, with feelings worked upon, sir.', 'I am sorry to perceive, sir, that you have been allowing your own feelings to be worked upon. Now, pray don t. These losses are much to be deplored, sir, but we must look ', 'If the money I have sacrificed had been all my own, Mr Rugg, I should have cared far less.', 'Indeed, sir? You surprise me. That s their own money people are most particular about. I have seen people get rid of a good deal of other people', 'You surprise me. That s their own money people are most particular about. I have seen people get rid of a good deal of other people', 'Now, Mr Clennam, by your leave, let us go into the matter. Let us see the state of the case. The question is simple. The question is the usual plain, straightforward, common-sense question. What can we do for ourself? What can we do for ourself?', 'This is not the question with me, Mr Rugg, You mistake it in the beginning. It is, what can I do for my partner, how can I best make reparation to him?', 'I am afraid, sir, do you know, that you are still allowing your feeling to be worked upon. I _don', 'Mr Rugg, you give me the impression that you will not be much disposed to adopt the course I have made up my mind to take. If your disapproval of it should render you unwilling to discharge such business as it necessitates, I am sorry for it, and must seek other aid. But I will represent to you at once, that to argue against it with me is useless.', 'Good, sir, Good, sir. Since the business is to be done by some hands, let it be done by mine. Such was my principle in the case of Rugg and Bawkins. Such is my principle in most cases.', 'I must take the consequences of what I have done, The writs will find me here.', 'I thought I t go on to the Counting-house this morning if I was you, sir.', 'Why not, Mr Rugg?', 'There are as many as five out, to my knowledge.', 'It cannot be too soon over, Let them take me at once.', 'Yes, but, hear reason, hear reason. They t doubt; but, hear reason. It almost always happens, in these cases, that some insignificant matter pushes itself in front and makes much of itself. Now, I find there t be taken upon that.', 'Why not?', 'I  said Mr Rugg.  s as well to keep up appearances. As your professional adviser, I should prefer your being taken on a writ from one of the Superior Courts, if you have no objection to do me that favour. It looks better.', 'Mr Rugg, my only wish is, that it should be over. I will go on, and take my chance.', 'Another word of reason, sir! Now, this _is_ reason. The other may be taste; but this is reason. If you should be taken on a little one, sir, you would go to the Marshalsea. Now, you know what the Marshalsea is. Very close. Excessively confined. Whereas in the King', 'I would rather, be taken to the Marshalsea than to any other prison.', 'Do you say so indeed, sir? Then this is taste, too, and we may be walking.', 'Shall I accompany you, Mr Clennam?', 'I would rather go alone, thank you. Be so good as send me my clothes.', 'Where I little thought, Heaven forgive me, that I should ever enter thus!', 'that I should ever enter thus!', 'You can come now.', 'You want a room. I have got you one.', 'I thank you heartily.', 'I don t. But I thought you', 'I am off the Lock, Mr Clennam, and going out. Can I do anything for you?', 'Many thanks. Nothing.', 'You  said Mr Chivery;  t make you hear.', 'Did you knock? Half-a-dozen times.', 'Your things is come, and my son is going to carry  em up but for his wishing to carry  em himself, and so I couldn em up. Mr Clennam, could I say a word to you?', 'em up. I should have sent  em himself. Indeed he would have  t send ', 'Pray come in,', 'Thank you, sir, it t you take no notice of my son (if you art, and my son art is in the right place. Me and his mother knows where to find it, and we find it sitiwated correct.', 'art, and my son art is in the right place. Me and his mother knows where to find it, and we find it sitiwated correct.', 'Here', 'It', 'I am very sensible of this attention. I hope we may shake hands now, Mr John.', 'I don t!', 'Why are you angry with me, and yet so ready to do me these kind services? There must be some mistake between us. If I have done anything to occasion it I am sorry.', 'No mistake, sir, No mistake, sir, in the feelings with which my eyes behold you at the present moment! If I was at all fairly equal to your weight, Mr Clennam--which I am not; and if you weren t against all rules of the Marshalsea--which it is; those feelings are such, that they would stimulate me, more to having it out with you in a Round on the present spot than to anything else I could name.', 'Well, well! A mistake, a mistake!', 'Freely granted, Say no more. I am not worth it.', 'This furniture, sir, belongs to me. I am in the habit of letting it out to parties without furniture, that have the room. It an s at your service. Free, I mean. I could not think of letting you have it on any other terms. You', 'What is the matter between us?', 'I decline to name it, sir, Nothing', 'The little round table, sir, that t mention him--he died a great gentleman. I bought it of an individual that he gave it to, and that lived here after him. But the individual wasn', 'Perhaps you may not be aware, sir, that I intruded upon him when he was over here in London. On the whole he was of opinion that it _was_ an intrusion, though he was so good as to ask me to sit down and to inquire after father and all other old friends. Leastways humblest acquaintances. He looked, to me, a good deal changed, and I said so when I came back. I asked him if Miss Amy was well--', 'And she was?', 'I should have thought you would have known without putting the question to such as me, Since you do put me the question, I am sorry I can', 'If it', 'I have not felt the want of anything yet, I have no appetite just now.', 'The more reason why you should take some support, sir, If you find yourself going on sitting here for hours and hours partaking of no refreshment because you have no appetite, why then you should and must partake of refreshment without an appetite. I s not a liberty, please to come and take a cup. Or I can bring a tray here in two minutes.', 'I see you recollect the room, Mr Clennam?', 'I recollect it well, Heaven bless her!', 'Try a little something green,', 'Try a little more something green, sir,', 'I wonder, that if it s not worth doing for some one else', 'Truly, I don', 'Mr Clennam, I am surprised that a gentleman who is capable of the straightforwardness that you are capable of, should be capable of the mean action of making me such an answer. Mr Clennam, I am surprised that a gentleman who is capable of having a heart of his own, should be capable of the heartlessness of treating mine in that way. I am astonished at it, sir. Really and truly I am astonished!', 'I had got over it, sir, I had conquered it, knowing that it _must_ be conquered, and had come to the resolution to think no more about it. I shouldn  (In his agitation Young John adopted his mother When you first came upon me, sir, in the Lodge, this day, more as if a Upas tree had been made a capture of than a private defendant, such mingled streams of feelings broke loose again within me, that everything was for the first few minutes swept away before them, and I was going round and round in a vortex. I got out of it. I struggled, and got out of it. If it was the last word I had to speak, against that vortex with my utmost powers I strove, and out of it I came. I argued that if I had been rude, apologies was due, and those apologies without a question of demeaning, I did make. And now, when I  said Young John, ', 'I hadn  John declared,  t, and I never had the audaciousness to think, I am sure, that all was anything but lost. I hadn t if I ever had, any hope that it was possible to be so blest, not after the words that passed, not even if barriers insurmountable had not been raised! But is that a reason why I am to have no memory, why I am to have no thoughts, why I am to have no sacred spots, nor anything?', 'What can you mean?', 'It  John went on, scouring a very prairie of wild words,  s all very well to trample on it, but it t be trampled upon if it wasn t make it gentlemanly, that doesn t justify throwing a person back upon himself after he has struggled and strived out of himself like a butterfly. The world may sneer at a turnkey, but he t a woman, which among female criminals he', 'It seems to me just possible, that you have made some reference to Miss Dorrit.', 'It is just possible, sir,', 'I don t understand it.', 'Sir, will you have the perfidy to deny that you know and long have known that I felt towards Miss Dorrit, call it not the presumption of love, but adoration and sacrifice?', 'Indeed, John, I will not have any perfidy if I know it; why you should suspect me of it I am at a loss to think. Did you ever hear from Mrs Chivery, your mother, that I went to see her once?', 'No, sir, Never heard of such a thing.', 'But I did. Can you imagine why?', 'No, sir, I can', 'I will tell you. I was solicitous to promote Miss Dorrit', 'similarly was her gen-teel family.', 'You speak, John, like a Man.', 'Well, sir, then I wish you', 'Leastways, if too strong a remark, withdrawn! But, why not, why not? When I say to you, Mr Clennam, take care of yourself for some one else d like best? Why did I carry up your things? Not that I found  t mention  re very great, I s merits have had their weight, and have had far more weight with Me. Then why not speak free?', 'Unaffectedly, John, you are so good a fellow and I have so true a respect for your character, that if I have appeared to be less sensible than I really am of the fact that the kind services you have rendered me to-day are attributable to my having been trusted by Miss Dorrit as her friend--I confess it to be a fault, and I ask your forgiveness.', 'Oh! why not, why not speak free!', 'I declare to you, that I do not understand you. Look at me. Consider the trouble I have been in. Is it likely that I would wilfully add to my other self-reproaches, that of being ungrateful or treacherous to you. I do not understand you.', 'Mr Clennam, do you mean to say that you don', 'What, John?', 'Lord, He says, What!', 'He says What! And what is more, he appears to mean it! Do you see this window, sir?', 'Of course I see this window.', 'See this room?', 'Why, of course I see this room.', 'That wall opposite, and that yard down below? They have all been witnesses of it, from day to day, from night to night, from week to week, from month to month. For how often have I seen Miss Dorrit here when she has not seen me!', 'Witnesses of what?', 'Of Miss Dorrit', 'For whom?', 'You,', 'Me!', 'Ah! You!', 'I mistaken, sir! _I_ completely mistaken on that subject! No, Mr Clennam, don t set up to be a penetrating character, and am well aware of my own deficiencies. But, _I_ mistaken on a point that has caused me more smart in my breast than a flight of savages s feelings! I mistaken on a point that, even at the present moment, makes me take out my pocket-handkerchief like a great girl, as people say: though I am sure I don em great and small. Don t tell me so!', 'The way father has been talking about you, Mr Clennam, you hardly would believe. It t get a note out for the children at tea, if you', 'As to Mr Baptist, whatever he t conceive nor yet imagine. He s away on confidential business of your own. The persevering manner in which he follows up that business, and gives himself no rest from it--it really do, as I say to him, Mooshattonisha padrona.', 'But what I say is, Mr Clennam, there s not hard to think what the present something is. It', 'It  reiterated Mrs Plornish,  s to be hoped she is not likely to hear of it. If she had been here to see it, sir, it  Mrs Plornish repeated those words-- s nothing I can think of, that would have touched Miss Dorrit so bad as that.', 'Yes! And it shows what notice father takes, though at his time of life, that he says to me this afternoon, which Happy Cottage knows I neither make it up nor any ways enlarge, "Mary, it s words. Father  Mrs Plornish concluded, with the air of a very precise legal witness, ', 'You are surprised to see me, Mr Clennam,', 'I must confess to being much surprised.', 'Not disagreeably, I hope?', 'By no means.', 'Thank you. Frankly, I have been excessively sorry to hear that you were under the necessity of a temporary retirement here, and I hope (of course as between two private gentlemen) that our place has had nothing to do with it?', 'Your office?', 'Our Circumlocution place.', 'I cannot charge any part of my reverses upon that remarkable establishment.', 'Upon my life, I am heartily glad to know it. It is quite a relief to me to hear you say it. I should have so exceedingly regretted our place having had anything to do with your difficulties.', 'That  said Ferdinand.  t want to do it; but if men will be gravelled, why--we can', 'Without giving an unqualified assent to what you say, I am much obliged to you for your interest in me.', 'No, but really! Our place is, the most inoffensive place possible. You t say we are not; but all that sort of thing is intended to be, and must be. Don', 'I do not,', 'You don ll find anywhere.', 'Is your place there to be left alone?', 'You exactly hit it, It is there with the express intention that everything shall be left alone. That is what it means. That is what it s a certain form to be kept up that it s only a form. Why, good Heaven, we are nothing but forms! Think what a lot of our forms you have gone through. And you have never got any nearer to an end?', 'Never,', 'Look at it from the right point of view, and there you have us--official and effectual. It', 'And this occasions me to congratulate myself again, on the circumstance that our place has had nothing to do with your temporary retirement. It very easily might have had a hand in it; because it is undeniable that we are sometimes a most unlucky place, in our effects upon people who will not leave us alone. Mr Clennam, I am quite unreserved with you. As between yourself and myself, I know I may be. I was so, when I first saw you making the mistake of not leaving us alone; because I perceived that you were inexperienced and sanguine, and had--I hope you', 'on the circumstance that our place has had nothing to do with your temporary retirement. It very easily might have had a hand in it; because it is undeniable that we are sometimes a most unlucky place, in our effects upon people who will not leave us alone. Mr Clennam, I am quite unreserved with you. As between yourself and myself, I know I may be. I was so, when I first saw you making the mistake of not leaving us alone; because I perceived that you were inexperienced and sanguine, and had--I hope you', 'Not at all.', 'Some simplicity. Therefore I felt what a pity it was, and I went out of my way to hint to you (which really was not official, but I never am official when I can help it) something to the effect that if I were you, I wouldn t do it any more.', 'I am not likely to have the opportunity,', 'Oh yes, you are! You t come back to us. That entreaty is the second object of my call. Pray, don  said Ferdinand in a very friendly and confiding way,  t take warning by the past and keep away from us.', 'And the invention?', 'My good fellow, if you', 'Nobody in the Office, that is to say?', 'Nor out of it. Everybody is ready to dislike and ridicule any invention. You have no idea how many people want to be left alone. You have no idea how the Genius of the country (overlook the Parliamentary nature of the phrase, and don  said the sprightly young Barnacle in his pleasantest manner, ', 'If I could believe that, it would be a dismal prospect for all of us.', 'Oh! Don  returned Ferdinand.  s all right. We must have humbug, we all like humbug, we couldn', 'Is it fair to ask, whether it is true that our late lamented Merdle is the cause of this passing inconvenience?', 'I am one of the many he has ruined. Yes.', 'He must have been an exceedingly clever fellow,', 'A consummate rascal, of course, but remarkably clever! One cannot help admiring the fellow. Must have been such a master of humbug. Knew people so well--got over them so completely--did so much with them!', 'I hope, that he and his dupes may be a warning to people not to have so much done with them again.', 'My dear Mr Clennam, have you really such a verdant hope? The next man who has as large a capacity and as genuine a taste for swindling, will succeed as well. Pardon me, but I think you really have no idea how the human bees will swarm to the beating of any old tin kettle; in that fact lies the complete manual of governing them. When they can be got to believe that the kettle is made of the precious metals, in that fact lies the whole power of men like our late lamented. No doubt there are here and there, exceptional cases, where people have been taken in for what appeared to them to be much better reasons; and I need not go far to find such a case; but they don t come a step beyond the door. I know the way out perfectly. Good day!', 'How do you do to-day, sir? Is there any little thing I can do for you to-day, sir?', 'No, I thank you.', 'I still look round, from time to time, sir, to see whether any lingering Detainers are accumulating at the gate. They have fallen in pretty thick, sir; as thick as we could have expected.', 'to see whether any lingering Detainers are accumulating at the gate. They have fallen in pretty thick, sir; as thick as we could have expected.', 'As thick, as we could reasonably have expected. Quite a shower-bath of  t often intrude upon you now, when I look round, because I know you are not inclined for company, and that if you wished to see me, you would leave word in the Lodge. But I am here pretty well every day, sir. Would this be an unseasonable time, sir, for me to offer an observation?', 'As seasonable a time as any other.', 'Hum! Public opinion, sir, has been busy with you.', 'I don', 'Might it not be advisable, sir, now to make, at last and after all, a trifling concession to public opinion? We all do it in one way or another. The fact is, we must do it.', 'I cannot set myself right with it, Mr Rugg, and have no business to expect that I ever shall.', 'Don t say that. The cost of being moved to the Bench is almost insignificant, and if the general feeling is strong that you ought to be there, why--really--', 'I thought you had settled, Mr Rugg, that my determination to remain here was a matter of taste.', 'Well, sir, well! But is it good taste, is it good taste? That  Mr Rugg was so soothingly persuasive as to be quite pathetic.  t tell you, sir, in how many quarters I heard it mentioned. I heard comments made upon it last night in a Parlour frequented by what I should call, if I did not look in there now and then myself, the best legal company--I heard, there, comments on it that I was sorry to hear. They hurt me on your account. Again, only this morning at breakfast. My daughter (but a woman, you t a trifling concession to that opinion be--Come, sir, I will put it on the lowest ground of argument, and say, Amiable?', 'I was almost going to say, is it good feeling? This is an extensive affair of yours; and your remaining here where a man can come for a pound or two, is remarked upon as not in keeping. It is not in keeping. I can ll say: yet still with a feeling for these things, and even with some little personal experience, as the plaintiff in Rugg and Bawkins) was expressing her great surprise; her great surprise. Now under these circumstances, and considering that none of us can quite set ourselves above public opinion, wouldn  said Rugg, ', 'As to myself, sir, it is a principle of mine not to consider myself when a client t let that influence you, sir. I merely state the fact.', 'Oh! Beyond a doubt, sir. I have travelled out of the record, sir, I am aware, in putting the point to you. But really, when I hear it remarked in several companies, and in very good company, that however worthy of a foreigner, it is not worthy of the spirit of an Englishman to remain in the Marshalsea when the glorious liberties of his island home admit of his removal to the Bench, I thought I would depart from the narrow professional line marked out to me, and mention it. Personally, I have no opinion on the topic.', 'That', 'Oh! None at all, sir! If I had, I should have been unwilling, some minutes ago, to see a client of mine visited in this place by a gentleman of a high family riding a saddle-horse. But it was not my business. If I had, I might have wished to be now empowered to mention to another gentleman, a gentleman of military exterior at present waiting in the Lodge, that my client had never intended to remain here, and was on the eve of removal to a superior abode. But my course as a professional machine is clear; I have nothing to do with it. Is it your good pleasure to see the gentleman, sir?', 'Who is waiting to see me, did you say?', 'I did take that unprofessional liberty, sir. Hearing that I was your professional adviser, he declined to interpose before my very limited function was performed. Happily, I did not so far travel out of the record as to ask the gentleman for his name.', 'I suppose I have no resource but to see him,', 'Then it _is_ your good pleasure, sir? Am I honoured by your instructions to mention as much to the gentleman, as I pass out? I am? Thank you, sir. I take my leave.', 'Salve, fellow jail-bird! You want me, it seems. Here I am!', 'I have it on the witnessing of these two madmen, that you want me, brother-bird. Here I am!', 'You villain of ill-omen! You have purposely cast a dreadful suspicion upon my mother', 'Signore! for to commence, hear me! I received your instructions to find him, Rigaud; is it not?', 'It is the truth.', 'I go, consequentementally, first among my countrymen. I ask them what news in Londra, of foreigners arrived. Then I go among the French. Then I go among the Germans. They all tell me. The great part of us know well the other, and they all tell me. But!--no person can tell me nothing of him, Rigaud. Fifteen times, I ask of him in every place where go the foreigners; and fifteen times, they know nothing. But!--', 'But!--After a long time when I have not been able to find that he is here in Londra, some one tells me of a soldier with white hair--hey?--not hair like this that he carries--white--who lives retired secrettementally, in a certain place. But!-- who sometimes in the after-dinner, walks, and smokes. It is necessary, as they say in Italy (and as they know, poor people), to have patience. I have patience. I ask where is this certain place. One. believes it is here, one believes it is there. Eh well! It is not here, it is not there. I wait patientissamentally. At last I find it. Then I watch; then I hide, until he walks and smokes. He is a soldier with grey hair--But!-- he is also this man that you see.', 'Eh well, Signore! I waited for a good opportunity. I writed some words to Signor Panco, to come and help. I showed him, Rigaud, at his window, to Signor Panco, who was often the spy in the day. I slept at night near the door of the house. At last we entered, only this to-day, and now you see him! As he would not come up in presence of the illustrious Advocate, s honourable mention of Mr Rugg, ', 'Now, Philosopher! What do you want with me?', 'I want to know, how you dare direct a suspicion of murder against my mother', 'how you dare direct a suspicion of murder against my mother', 'Dare! Ho, ho! Hear him! Dare? Is it dare? By Heaven, my small boy, but you are a little imprudent!', 'I want that suspicion to be cleared away, You shall be taken there, and be publicly seen. I want to know, moreover, what business you had there when I had a burning desire to fling you down-stairs. Don', 'Give me a bottle of wine. You can buy wine here. Send one of your madmen to get me a bottle of wine. I won', 'Fetch him what he wants, Cavalletto,', 'Contraband beast, bring Port wine! I', 'Madman! A large glass,', 'Haha! Once a gentleman, and always a gentleman. A gentleman from the beginning, and a gentleman to the end. What the Devil! A gentleman must be waited on, I hope? It', 'Hah! Not a very old prisoner _that_! I judge by your looks, brave sir, that imprisonment will subdue your blood much sooner than it softens this hot wine. You are mellowing--losing body and colour already. I salute you!', 'To business, To conversation. You have shown yourself more free of speech than body, sir.', 'I have used the freedom of telling you what you know yourself to be. You know yourself, as we all know you, to be far worse than that.', 'Add, always a gentleman, and it t for your life be a gentleman; I couldn', 'No, my son, I play my game to the end in spite of words; and Death of my Body and Death of my Soul! I s expense!--I conceived the happy idea of disappearing. An idea, see you, that your characteristic mother and my Flintwinch would have been well enough pleased to execute. Ah! Bah, bah, bah, don', 'I', 'This happy idea, brave sir, was a happy idea for several reasons. It amused me, it worried your dear mama and my Flintwinch, it caused you agonies (my terms for a lesson in politeness towards a gentleman), and it suggested to all the amiable persons interested that your entirely devoted is a man to fear. By Heaven, he is a man to fear! Beyond this; it might have restored her wit to my lady your mother--might, under the pressing little suspicion your wisdom has recognised, have persuaded her at last to announce, covertly, in the journals, that the difficulties of a certain contract would be removed by the appearance of a certain important party to it. Perhaps yes, perhaps no. But that, you have interrupted. Now, what is it you say? What is it you want?', 'Perhaps, my friend, philosopher, man of virtue, Imbecile, what you will; perhaps, you would have done better to leave me alone?', 'No! At least, you are known to be alive and unharmed. At least you cannot escape from these two witnesses; and they can produce you before any public authorities, or before hundreds of people!', 'But will not produce me before one, To the Devil with your witnesses! To the Devil with your produced! To the Devil with yourself! What! Do I know what I know, for that? Have I my commodity on sale, for that? Bah, poor debtor! You have interrupted my little project. Let it pass. How then? What remains? To you, nothing; to me, all. Produce _me_! Is that what you want? I will produce myself, only too quickly. Contrabandist! Give me pen, ink, and paper.', 'Prison of the Marshalsea. ', 'Dear Madam, ', 'I kiss the hands of Madame F.', 'Cavalletto, Will you take this fellow', 'Touch me with a finger, touch me with an epithet, question my superiority as I sit here drinking my wine at my pleasure, and I follow the letter and cancel my week', 'and I follow the letter and cancel my week', 'You know, that when I sought you, I was not a prisoner.', 'that when I sought you, I was not a prisoner.', 'To the Devil with you and your prison, I care for neither of you. Contrabandist! A light.', 'Hola, Pig! What! The infernal old jail was a respectable one to this. There was dignity in the bars and stones of that place. It was a prison for men. But this? Bah! A hospital for imbeciles!', 'One must pass the time in the madman t drink strong wine all day long, or I would have another bottle. She', 'I neither know nor ask, of whom you speak.', 'Della bella Gowana, sir, as they say in Italy. Of the Gowan, the fair Gowan.', 'Of whose husband you were the--follower, I think?', 'Sir? Follower? You are insolent. The friend.', 'Do you sell all your friends?', 'I sell anything that commands a price. How do your lawyers live, your politicians, your intriguers, your men of the Exchange? How do you live? How do you come here? Have you sold no friend? Lady of mine! I rather think, yes!', 'Effectively, sir, Society sells itself and sells me: and I sell Society. I perceive you have acquaintance with another lady. Also handsome. A strong spirit. Let us see. How do they call her? Wade.', 'Yes, that handsome lady and strong spirit addresses me in the street, and I am not insensible. I respond. That handsome lady and strong spirit does me the favour to remark, in full confidence, "I have my curiosity, and I have my chagrins. You are not more than ordinarily honourable, perhaps?" I announce myself, "Madame, a gentleman from the birth, and a gentleman to the death; but _not_ more than ordinarily honourable. I despise such a weak fantasy." Thereupon she is pleased to compliment. "The difference between you and the rest is," she answers, "that you say so." For she knows Society. I accept her congratulations with gallantry and politeness. Politeness and little gallantries are inseparable from my character. She then makes a proposition, which is, in effect, that she has seen us much together; that it appears to her that I am for the passing time the cat of the house, the friend of the family; that her curiosity and her chagrins awaken the fancy to be acquainted with their movements, to know the manner of their life, how the fair Gowana is beloved, how the fair Gowana is cherished, and so on. She is not rich, but offers such and such little recompenses for the little cares and derangements of such services; and I graciously--to do everything graciously is a part of my character--consent to accept them. O yes! So goes the world. It is the mode.', 'Whoof! The fair Gowana! Charming, but imprudent! For it was not well of the fair Gowana to make mysteries of letters from old lovers, in her bedchamber on the mountain, that her husband might not see them. No, no. That was not well. Whoof! The Gowana was mistaken there.', 'I earnestly hope, that Pancks may not be long gone, for this man', 'Ah! But he  said Rigaud, with an exulting look and snap of his fingers. ', 'Sing the Refrain, pig! You could sing it once, in another jail. Sing it! Or, by every Saint who was stoned to death, I', 'How do you find yourself, sir? Thank you, no; I don  This was in reference to another menace of attention from his recovered friend.  s come true, you see.', 'Thank you, no; I don  This was in reference to another menace of attention from his recovered friend.  s come true, you see.', 'And this is the Marshalsea prison for debt! Hah! you have brought your pigs to a very indifferent market, Arthur.', 'To the Devil with the Market, to the Devil with the Pigs, and to the Devil with the Pig-Driver! Now! Give me the answer to my letter.', 'If you can make it convenient to let go a moment, sir, I', 'I hope it is enough that you have ruined yourself. Rest contented without more ruin. Jeremiah Flintwinch is my messenger and representative. Your affectionate M. C.', 'Now, Beau Flintwinch, the answer to my letter?', 'Mrs Clennam did not write, Mr Blandois, her hands being cramped, and she thinking it as well to send it verbally by me. She sends her compliments, and says she doesn', 'Come, Pig, I have had you for a follower against my will; now, I', 'Afraid of him,', 'O, my best friend! Dear Mr Clennam, don', 'I hoped you would like me better in this dress than any other. I have always kept it by me, to remind me: though I wanted no reminding. I am not alone, you see. I have brought an old friend with me.', 'It was only yesterday evening that I came to London with my brother. I sent round to Mrs Plornish almost as soon as we arrived, that I might hear of you and let you know I had come. Then I heard that you were here. Did you happen to think of me in the night? I almost believe you must have thought of me a little. I thought of you so anxiously, and it appeared so long to morning.', 'I have thought of you--', 'You have not spoken to me by my right name yet. You know what my right name always is with you.', 'I have thought of you, Little Dorrit, every day, every hour, every minute, since I have been here.', 'Have you? Have you?', 'I was here before the gates were opened, but I was afraid to come straight to you. I should have done you more harm than good, at first; for the prison was so familiar and yet so strange, and it brought back so many remembrances of my poor father, and of you too, that at first it overpowered me. But we went to Mr Chivery before we came to the gate, and he brought us in, and got John t hear me.', 'Dear Mr Clennam, I must say something to you before I go. I have put it off from hour to hour, but I must say it.', 'I too, dear Little Dorrit. I have put off what I must say.', 'I am not going abroad again. My brother is, but I am not. He was always attached to me, and he is so grateful to me now--so much too grateful, for it is only because I happened to be with him in his illness--that he says I shall be free to stay where I like best, and to do what I like best. He only wishes me to be happy, he says.', 'You will understand, I dare say, without my telling you, that my brother has come home to find my dear father', 'I have no use for money, I have no wish for it. It would be of no value at all to me but for your sake. I could not be rich, and you here. I must always be much worse than poor, with you distressed. Will you let me lend you all I have? Will you let me give it you? Will you let me show you that I have never forgotten, that I never can forget, your protection of me when this was my home? Dear Mr Clennam, make me of all the world the happiest, by saying Yes? Make me as happy as I can be in leaving you here, by saying nothing to-night, and letting me go away with the hope that you will think of it kindly; and that for my sake--not for yours, for mine, for nobody t say what I wish to say. I can t think of you here where I have seen so much, and be as calm and comforting as I ought. My tears will make their way. I cannot keep them back. But pray, pray, pray, do not turn from your Little Dorrit, now, in your affliction! Pray, pray, pray, I beg you and implore you with all my grieving heart, my friend--my dear!--take all I have, and make it a Blessing to me!', 'No, darling Little Dorrit. No, my child. I must not hear of such a sacrifice. Liberty and hope would be so dear, bought at such a price, that I could never support their weight, never bear the reproach of possessing them. But with what ardent thankfulness and love I say this, I may call Heaven to witness!', 'And yet you will not let me be faithful to you in your affliction?', 'Say, dearest Little Dorrit, and yet I will try to be faithful to you. If, in the bygone days when this was your home and when this was your dress, I had understood myself (I speak only of myself) better, and had read the secrets of my own breast more distinctly; if, through my reserve and self-mistrust, I had discerned a light that I see brightly now when it has passed far away, and my weak footsteps can never overtake it; if I had then known, and told you that I loved and honoured you, not as the poor child I used to call you, but as a woman whose true hand would raise me high above myself and make me a far happier and better man; if I had so used the opportunity there is no recalling--as I wish I had, O I wish I had!--and if something had kept us apart then, when I was moderately thriving, and when you were poor; I might have met your noble offer of your fortune, dearest girl, with other words than these, and still have blushed to touch it. But, as it is, I must never touch it, never!', 'I am disgraced enough, my Little Dorrit. I must not descend so low as that, and carry you--so dear, so generous, so good--down with me. GOD bless you, GOD reward you! It is past.', 'Always so much older, so much rougher, and so much less worthy, even what I was must be dismissed by both of us, and you must see me only as I am. I put this parting kiss upon your cheek, my child--who might have been more near to me, who never could have been more dear--a ruined man far removed from you, for ever separated from you, whose course is run while yours is but beginning. I have not the courage to ask to be forgotten by you in my humiliation; but I ask to be remembered only as I am.', 'One other word, my Little Dorrit. A hard one to me, but it is a necessary one. The time when you and this prison had anything in common has long gone by. Do you understand?', 'O! you will never say to me, that I am not to come back any more! You will surely not desert me so!', 'I would say it, if I could; but I have not the courage quite to shut out this dear face, and abandon all hope of its return. But do not come soon, do not come often! This is now a tainted place, and I well know the taint of it clings to me. You belong to much brighter and better scenes. You are not to look back here, my Little Dorrit; you are to look away to very different and much happier paths. Again, GOD bless you in them! GOD reward you!', 'It t mind. I was determined to come through, and come to you.', 'What is the matter?', 'Nothing d like some one to see that she was safe.', 'Thank you, thank you! You took her home, John?', 'I saw her to her hotel. The same that Mr Dorrit was at. Miss Dorrit walked all the way, and talked to me so kind, it quite knocked me over. Why do you think she walked instead of riding?', 'I don', 'To talk about you. She said to me, "John, you was always honourable, and if you ll stand by you, for ever!', 'for ever!', 'Before I take it, guess what message Miss Dorrit gave me.', '"Tell him," "that his Little Dorrit sent him her undying love." Now it', '"that his Little Dorrit sent him her undying love." Now it', 'Very, very!', 'Will you tell Miss Dorrit I', 'I will indeed.', 'There  said John,  ll stand by you forever!', 'You pair of madmen! Don', 'We don', 'Who are these? What do these people want here?', 'What do these people want here?', 'Who are these, dear madame, is it? Faith, they are friends of your son the prisoner. And what do they want here, is it? Death, madame, I don', 'You know you told us at the door, not to go yet,', 'And you know you told me at the door, you didn  retorted Rigaud.  s--madmen, but spies. If you wish them to remain here during our little conversation, say the word. It is nothing to me.', 'Why should I wish them to remain here? What have I to do with them?', 'Then, dearest madame, you will do well to dismiss them. It is your affair. They are not my spies, not my rascals.', 'Hark! You Pancks, you Casby s business and your own. Go. And take that other man with you.', 'Thank you, ma  returned Mr Pancks,   added Mr Pancks, ', 'Your opinion is not asked, Go.', 'I am sorry not to leave you in better company, ma  said Pancks;  t be present. It', 'and sorry, too, that Mr Clennam can s my fault, that is.', 'You mean his own,', 'No, I mean mine, ma  said Pancks,   (Mr Pancks still clung to that word, and never said speculation.)   added Mr Pancks, with an anxious countenance,   Mr Pancks pursued, with a longing glance into his hat, where he kept his calculations, ', 'However, enough of that. Altro, old boy, you have seen the figures, and you know how they come out.', 'Oh! it t certain till I saw your teeth. Ah! yes, to be sure. It was this officious refugee, who came knocking at the door on the night when Arthur and Chatterbox were here, and who asked me a whole Catechism of questions about Mr Blandois.', 'It is true, And behold him, padrone! I have found him consequentementally.', 'I shouldn  returned Mr Flintwinch, ', 'And now, I  said Mr Pancks, taking one step aside towards the window-seat, and laying his right hand upon the stocking; ', 'Come! Whatever has to be said among us had better be begun to be said without more loss of time.--So, Affery, my woman, take yourself away!', 'No, I won t--no, I won t go! I ll hear all I don', 'Not a bit nearer, Jeremiah! Don ll rouse the neighbourhood! I ll scream Fire and Murder! I ll make shrieks enough to wake the dead!', 'It is closing in, Flintwinch. Let her alone. Affery, do you turn against me after these many years?', 'I do, if it t know, and say what I know. I have broke out now, and I can s turning against you, yes, I turn against both of you two clever ones. I told Arthur when he first come home to stand up against you. I told him it was no reason, because I was afeard of my life of you, that he should be. All manner of things have been a-going on since then, and I won t be dazed and scared, nor made a party to I don t, I won t! I t up for himself. I will, I will, I will, I will!', 'How do you know, you heap of confusion, that in doing what you are doing now, you are even serving Arthur?', 'that in doing what you are doing now, you are even serving Arthur?', 'I don  said Affery;  s when you call me a heap of confusion, for you two clever ones have done your most to make me such. You married me whether I liked it or not, and you t submit no longer; no, I won t, I won t!', 'I, madame, do I? That', 'I do not, There is little left to choose now. Flintwinch, it is closing in.', 'Madame, I am a gentleman--', 'Of whom, I have heard disparagement, in connection with a French jail and an accusation of murder.', 'Perfectly. Exactly. Of a lady too! What absurdity! How incredible! I had the honour of making a great success then; I hope to have the honour of making a great success now. I kiss your hands. Madame, I am a gentleman (I was going to observe), who when he says, "I will definitely finish this or that affair at the present sitting," does definitely finish it. I announce to you that we are arrived at our last sitting on our little business. You do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?', 'Further, I am a gentleman to whom mere mercenary trade-bargains are unknown, but to whom money is always acceptable as the means of pursuing his pleasures. You do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?', 'Scarcely necessary to ask, one would say. Yes.', 'Further, I am a gentleman of the softest and sweetest disposition, but who, if trifled with, becomes enraged. Noble natures under such circumstances become enraged. I possess a noble nature. When the lion is awakened--that is to say, when I enrage--the satisfaction of my animosity is as acceptable to me as money. You always do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?', 'Yes,', 'Do not let me derange you; pray be tranquil. I have said we are now arrived at our last sitting. Allow me to recall the two sittings we have held.', 'It is not necessary.', 'Death, madame, it  he glanced around the room and smiled, ', 'I say, gracefully departed, because it was graceful to retire without alarming a lady. To be morally graceful, not less than physically, is a part of the character of Rigaud Blandois. It was also politic, as leaving you with something overhanging you, to expect me again with a little anxiety on a day not named. But your slave is politic. By Heaven, madame, politic! Let us return. On the day not named, I have again the honour to render myself at your house. I intimate that I have something to sell, which, if not bought, will compromise madame whom I highly esteem. I explain myself generally. I demand--I think it was a thousand pounds. Will you correct me?', 'I demand at present, Two. Such are the evils of delay. But to return once more. We are not accordant; we differ on that occasion. I am playful; playfulness is a part of my amiable character. Playfully, I become as one slain and hidden. For, it may alone be worth half the sum to madame, to be freed from the suspicions that my droll idea awakens. Accident and spies intermix themselves against my playfulness, and spoil the fruit, perhaps--who knows? only you and Flintwinch--when it is just ripe. Thus, madame, I am here for the last time. Listen! Definitely the last.', 'Bah! Stop an instant! Let us advance by steps. Here is my Hotel-note to be paid, according to contract. Five minutes hence we may be at daggers ll not leave it till then, or you', 'Take it from his hand and pay it, Flintwinch,', 'The sound of it, to the bold Rigaud Blandois, is like the taste of fresh meat to the tiger. Say, then, madame. How much?', 'I tell you again, as I told you before, that we are not rich here, as you suppose us to be, and that your demand is excessive. I have not the present means of complying with such a demand, if I had ever so great an inclination.', 'If! Hear this lady with her If! Will you say that you have not the inclination?', 'I will say what presents itself to me, and not what presents itself to you.', 'Say it then. As to the inclination. Quick! Come to the inclination, and I know what to do.', 'The paper might be worth, to me, a sum of money. I cannot say how much, or how little.', 'What the Devil! Not after a week', 'No! I will not out of my scanty means--for I tell you again, we are poor here, and not rich--I will not offer any price for a power that I do not know the worst and the fullest extent of. This is the third time of your hinting and threatening. You must speak explicitly, or you may go where you will, and do what you will. It is better to be torn to pieces at a spring, than to be a mouse at the caprice of such a cat.', 'You are a bold woman!', 'I am a resolved woman.', 'You always were. What? She always was; is it not so, my little Flintwinch?', 'Flintwinch, say nothing to him. It is for him to say, here and now, all he can; or to go hence, and do all he can. You know this to be our determination. Leave him to his action on it.', 'It is your pleasure then, madame, that I shall relate a morsel of family history in this little family society, I am something of a doctor. Let me touch your pulse.', 'A history of a strange marriage, and a strange mother, and a revenge, and a suppression.--Aye, aye, aye? this pulse is beating curiously! It appears to me that it doubles while I touch it. Are these the usual changes of your malady, madame?', 'I have lived an adventurous life. I am an adventurous character. I have known many adventurers; interesting spirits--amiable society! To one of them I owe my knowledge and my proofs--I repeat it, estimable lady--proofs--of the ravishing little family history I go to commence. You will be charmed with it. But, bah! I forget. One should name a history. Shall I name it the history of a house? But, bah, again. There are so many houses. Shall I name it the history of this house?', 'In fine, then, I name it the history of this house. I commence it. There live here, let us suppose, an uncle and nephew. The uncle, a rigid old gentleman of strong force of character; the nephew, habitually timid, repressed, and under constraint.', 'Perfectly right, dear Madame Flintwinch. You have a genius for dreaming.', 'I don  returned Affery.  t want to have nothing at all to say to you. But Jeremiah said they was dreams, and I em as such! s mouth--perhaps Jeremiah', 'Our beloved Madame Flintwinch, developing all of a sudden a fine susceptibility and spirituality, is right to a marvel. Yes. So runs the history. Monsieur, the uncle, commands the nephew to marry. Monsieur says to him in effect, "My nephew, I introduce to you a lady of strong force of character, like myself--a resolved lady, a stern lady, a lady who has a will that can break the weak to powder: a lady without pity, without love, implacable, revengeful, cold as the stone, but raging as the fire." Ah! what fortitude! Ah, what superiority of intellectual strength! Truly, a proud and noble character that I describe in the supposed words of Monsieur, the uncle. Ha, ha, ha! Death of my soul, I love the sweet lady!', 'The nephew, being, as the lucid Madame Flintwinch has remarked, a poor devil who has had everything but his orphan life frightened and famished out of him--the nephew abases his head, and makes response: "My uncle, it is to you to command. Do as you will!" Monsieur, the uncle, does as he will. It is what he always does. The auspicious nuptials take place; the newly married come home to this charming mansion; the lady is received, let us suppose, by Flintwinch. Hey, old intriguer?', 'Soon the lady makes a singular and exciting discovery. Thereupon, full of anger, full of jealousy, full of vengeance, she forms--see you, madame!--a scheme of retribution, the weight of which she ingeniously forces her crushed husband to bear himself, as well as execute upon her enemy. What superior intelligence!', 'Keep off, Jeremiah! But it was one of my dreams, that you told her, when you quarrelled with her one winter evening at dusk--there she sits and you looking at her--that she oughtn t know what, for she burst out tremendous and stopped you. You know the dream as well as I do. When you come down-stairs into the kitchen with the candle in your hand, and hitched my apron off my head. When you told me I had been dreaming. When you wouldn', 'Haha! Assuredly, Madame Flintwinch is an oracle! How shall we interpret the oracle, you and I and the old intriguer? He said that you were not--? And you burst out and stopped him! What was it you were not? What is it you are not? Say then, madame!', 'Come then, madame! Speak, then! Our old intriguer said that you were not--and you stopped him. He was going to say that you were not--what? I know already, but I want a little confidence from you. How, then? You are not what?', 'Good, You are amenable.', 'Unless you are a more obstinate and more persisting woman than even I know you to be, you had better leave Mr Rigaud, Mr Blandois, Mr Beelzebub, to tell it in his own way. What does it signify when he knows all about it?', 'He does not know all about it.', 'He knows all he cares about it,', 'He does not know _me_.', 'What do you suppose he cares for you, you conceited woman?', 'I tell you, Flintwinch, I will speak. I tell you when it has come to this, I will tell it with my own lips, and will express myself throughout it. What! Have I suffered nothing in this room, no deprivation, no imprisonment, that I should condescend at last to contemplate myself in such a glass as _that_. Can you see him? Can you hear him? If your wife were a hundred times the ingrate that she is, and if I were a thousand times more hopeless than I am of inducing her to be silent if this man is silenced, I would tell it myself, before I would bear the torment of the hearing it from him.', 'You do not know what it is, to be brought up strictly and straitly. I was so brought up. Mine was no light youth of sinful gaiety and pleasure. Mine were days of wholesome repression, punishment, and fear. The corruption of our hearts, the evil of our ways, the curse that is upon us, the terrors that surround us--these were the themes of my childhood. They formed my character, and filled me with an abhorrence of evil-doers. When old Mr Gilbert Clennam proposed his orphan nephew to my father for my husband, my father impressed upon me that his bringing-up had been, like mine, one of severe restraint. He told me, that besides the discipline his spirit had undergone, he had lived in a starved house, where rioting and gaiety were unknown, and where every day was a day of toil and trial like the last. He told me that he had been a man in years long before his uncle had acknowledged him as one; and that from his school-days to that hour, his uncle', 'No! "Do not forget." The initials of those words are within here now, and were within here then. I was appointed to find the old letter that referred to them, and that told me what they meant, and whose work they were, and why they were worked, lying with this watch in his secret drawer. But for that appointment there would have been no discovery. "Do not forget." It spoke to me like a voice from an angry cloud. Do not forget the deadly sin, do not forget the appointed discovery, do not forget the appointed suffering. I did not forget. Was it my own wrong I remembered? Mine! I was but a servant and a minister. What power could I have over them, but that they were bound in the bonds of their sin, and delivered to me!', 'When I forced him to give her up to me, by her name and place of abode, when I accused her, and she fell hiding her face at my feet, was it my injury that I asserted, were they my reproaches that I poured upon her? Those who were appointed of old to go to wicked kings and accuse them--were they not ministers and servants? And had not I, unworthy and far-removed from them, sin to denounce? When she pleaded to me her youth, and his wretched and hard life (that was her phrase for the virtuous training he had belied), and the desecrated ceremony of marriage there had secretly been between them, and the terrors of want and shame that had overwhelmed them both when I was first appointed to be the instrument of their punishment, and the love (for she said the word to me, down at my feet) in which she had abandoned him and left him to me, was it _my_ enemy that became my footstool, were they the words of my wrath that made her shrink and quiver! Not unto me the strength be ascribed; not unto me the wringing of the expiation!', 'And what was the repentance that was extorted from the hardness of her heart and the blackness of her depravity? I, vindictive and implacable? It may be so, to such as you who know no righteousness, and no appointment except Satan', 'Add, to yourself, madame, I have my little suspicions that madame is rather solicitous to be justified to herself.', 'It is false. It is not so. I have no need to be,', 'Truly? Hah!', 'I ask, what was the penitence, in works, that was demanded of her? "You have a child; I have none. You love that child. Give him to me. He shall believe himself to be my son, and he shall be believed by every one to be my son. To save you from exposure, his father shall swear never to see or communicate with you more; equally to save him from being stripped by his uncle, and to save your child from being a beggar, you shall swear never to see or communicate with either of them more. That done, and your present means, derived from my husband, renounced, I charge myself with your support. You may, with your place of retreat unknown, then leave, if you please, uncontradicted by me, the lie that when you passed out of all knowledge but mine, you merited a good name." That was all. She had to sacrifice her sinful and shameful affections; no more. She was then free to bear her load of guilt in secret, and to break her heart in secret; and through such present misery (light enough for her, I think!) to purchase her redemption from endless misery, if she could. If, in this, I punished her here, did I not open to her a way hereafter? If she knew herself to be surrounded by insatiable vengeance and unquenchable fires, were they mine? If I threatened her, then and afterwards, with the terrors that encompassed her, did I hold them in my right hand?', 'They did _not_ forget. It is appointed against such offences that the offenders shall not be able to forget. If the presence of Arthur was a daily reproach to his father, and if the absence of Arthur was a daily agony to his mother, that was the just dispensation of Jehovah. As well might it be charged upon me, that the stings of an awakened conscience drove her mad, and that it was the will of the Disposer of all things that she should live so, many years. I devoted myself to reclaim the otherwise predestined and lost boy; to give him the reputation of an honest origin; to bring him up in fear and trembling, and in a life of practical contrition for the sins that were heavy on his head before his entrance into this condemned world. Was that a cruelty? Was I, too, not visited with consequences of the original offence in which I had no complicity? Arthur', 'Wretch that you are, through what fatal error of Flintwinch', 'through what fatal error of Flintwinch', 'And yet, it is my odd fortune to have by me, in a convenient place that I know of, that same short little addition to the will of Monsieur Gilbert Clennam, written by a lady and witnessed by the same lady and our old intriguer! Ah, bah, old intriguer, crooked little puppet! Madame, let us go on. Time presses. You or I to finish?', 'I! I, because I will not endure to be shown myself, and have myself shown to any one, with your horrible distortion upon me. You, with your practices of infamous foreign prisons and galleys would make it the money that impelled me. It was not the money.', 'I, because I will not endure to be shown myself, and have myself shown to any one, with your horrible distortion upon me. You, with your practices of infamous foreign prisons and galleys would make it the money that impelled me. It was not the money.', 'Bah, bah, bah! I repudiate, for the moment, my politeness, and say, Lies, lies, lies. You know you suppressed the deed and kept the money.', 'Not for the money  She made a struggle as if she were starting up; even as if, in her vehemence, she had almost risen on her disabled feet. ', 'Time presses, madame. Take care!', 'If this house was blazing from the roof to the ground, I would stay in it to justify myself against my righteous motives being classed with those of stabbers and thieves.', 'I would stay in it to justify myself against my righteous motives being classed with those of stabbers and thieves.', 'That patron,', 'Names! Call him Mr Frederick Dorrit. No more evasions.', 'That Frederick Dorrit was the beginning of it all. If he had not been a player of music, and had not kept, in those days of his youth and prosperity, an idle house where singers, and players, and such-like children of Evil turned their backs on the Light and their faces to the Darkness, she might have remained in her lowly station, and might not have been raised out of it to be cast down. But, no. Satan entered into that Frederick Dorrit, and counselled him that he was a man of innocent and laudable tastes who did kind actions, and that here was a poor girl with a voice for singing music with. Then he is to have her taught. Then Arthur s agency, against me, and I am humbled and deceived!--Not I, that is to say, a greater than I. What am I?', 'Lastly, for I am at the end of these things, and I will say no more of them, and you shall say no more of them, and all that remains will be to determine whether the knowledge of them can be kept among us who are here present; lastly, when I suppressed that paper, with the knowledge of Arthur', 'But not with his consent, you know,', 'Who said with his consent? You were often enough between us when he would have had me produce it and I would not, to have contradicted me if I had said, with his consent. I say, when I suppressed that paper, I made no effort to destroy it, but kept it by me, here in this house, many years. The rest of the Gilbert property being left to Arthur  She added, after a moment, as though she addressed the watch: ', 'She herself was innocent, and I might not have forgotten to relinquish it to her at my death:', 'Shall I recall something to you, worthy madame? The little paper was in this house on the night when our friend the prisoner--jail-comrade of my soul--came home from foreign countries. Shall I recall yet something more to you? The little singing-bird that never was fledged, was long kept in a cage by a guardian of your appointing, well enough known to our old intriguer here. Shall we coax our old intriguer to tell us when he saw him last?', 'I  cried Affery, unstopping her mouth.  ll scream to be heard at St Paul s own twin brother; and he was here in the dead of the night, on the night when Arthur come home, and Jeremiah with his own hands give him this paper, along with I don', 'What! assault a lady with such a genius for dreaming! Ha, ha, ha! Why, she re so like him, Little Flintwinch. So like him, as I knew him (when I first spoke English for him to the host) in the Cabaret of the Three Billiard Tables, in the little street of the high roofs, by the wharf at Antwerp! Ah, but he was a brave boy to drink. Ah, but he was a brave boy to smoke! Ah, but he lived in a sweet bachelor-apartment--furnished, on the fifth floor, above the wood and charcoal merchant s, and the chair-maker', 'Ha, ha, ha! But what  cried Rigaud.  t know, one the other. Permit me, Madame Clennam who suppresses, to present Monsieur Flintwinch who intrigues.', 'Now, I know what you mean by opening your eyes so wide at me, but you needn t care for it. I re one of the most opinionated and obstinate of women. That s what _you_ are. I have told you, over and over again when we have had a tiff, that you wanted to make everything go down before you, but I wouldn t be swallowed up alive. Why didn s not your way to take advice. You must keep it forsooth. Perhaps you may carry it out at some other time, forsooth. As if I didn s the way you cheat yourself. Just as you cheat yourself into making out that you didn s my gammon. And to tell you all the truth while I am about it, I have been rasped--rasped these forty years--by your taking such high ground even with me, who knows better; the effect of it being coolly to put me on low ground. I admire you very much; you are a woman of strong head and great talent; but the strongest head, and the greatest talent, can t care for your present eyes. Now, I am coming to the paper, and mark what I say. You put it away somewhere, and you kept your own counsel where. You t get it. So it lies, long years, in its hiding-place. At last, when we are expecting Arthur home every day, and when any day may bring him home, and it t get at it, to let me get at it, that it may be put in the fire. But no--no one but you knows where it is, and that s watch. You know very well that the Do Not Forget, at the time when his father sent that watch to you, could only mean, the rest of the story being then all dead and over, Do Not Forget the suppression. Make restitution! Arthur  Mr Flintwinch grinned at his wife,  s not to be burnt on a Sunday night. No; you are strict, you are; we must wait over twelve o clock to refresh my memory as to its appearance--fold up one of the many yellow old papers in the cellars like it--and afterwards, when we have got into Monday morning, and I have, by the light of your lamp, to walk from you, lying on that bed, to this grate, make a little exchange like the conjuror, and burn accordingly. My brother Ephraim, the lunatic-keeper (I wish he had had himself to keep in a strait-waistcoat), had had many jobs since the close of the long job he got from you, but had not done well. His wife died (not that that was much; mine might have died instead, and welcome), he speculated unsuccessfully in lunatics, he got into difficulty about over-roasting a patient to bring him to reason, and he got into debt. He was going out of the way, on what he had been able to scrape up, and a trifle from me. He was here that early Monday morning, waiting for the tide; in short, he was going to Antwerp, where (I am afraid you s mother had been under the care of him and his wife, she had been always writing, incessantly writing,--mostly letters of confession to you, and Prayers for forgiveness. My brother had handed, from time to time, lots of these sheets to me. I thought I might as well keep them to myself as have them swallowed up alive too; so I kept them in a box, looking over them when I felt in the humour. Convinced that it was advisable to get the paper out of the place, with Arthur coming about it, I put it into this same box, and I locked the whole up with two locks, and I trusted it to my brother to take away and keep, till I should write about it. I did write about it, and never got an answer. I didn t want his word for it now to understand how he gets his knowledge from my papers, and your paper, and my brother d had to gag himself). Now, I have only one thing more to say, you hammer-headed woman, and that is, that I haven  said Mr Flintwinch, terminating his oration with a screw,  s no use keeping ', 'This box can never bring, elsewhere, the price it will bring here. This knowledge can never be of the same profit to you, sold to any other person, as sold to me. But I have not the present means of raising the sum you have demanded. I have not prospered. What will you take now, and what at another time, and how am I to be assured of your silence?', 'My angel, I have said what I will take, and time presses. Before coming here, I placed copies of the most important of these papers in another hand. Put off the time till the Marshalsea gate shall be shut for the night, and it will be too late to treat. The prisoner will have read them.', 'Say what you mean. Say what you mean, man!', 'Miss Dorrit, the little niece of Monsieur Frederick, whom I have known across the water, is attached to the prisoner. Miss Dorrit, little niece of Monsieur Frederick, watches at this moment over the prisoner, who is ill. For her I with my own hands left a packet at the prison, on my way here, with a letter of instructions, "_for his sake_"--she will do anything for his sake--to keep it without breaking the seal, in case of its being reclaimed before the hour of shutting up to-night--if it should not be reclaimed before the ringing of the prison bell, to give it to him; and it encloses a second copy for herself, which he must give to her. What! I don', 'Don t, don re a fearful woman, but I don t be afraid of me. I t go out, you s the poor thing that ll let me take charge of her and be her nurse. Only promise me that, and never be afraid of me.', 'Kept here? She has been dead a score of years or more. Ask Flintwinch--ask _him_. They can both tell you that she died when Arthur went abroad.', 'So much the worse, for she haunts the house, then. Who else rustles about it, making signals by dropping dust so softly? Who else comes and goes, and marks the walls with long crooked touches when we are all a-bed? Who else holds the door sometimes? But don t go out! Mistress, you', 'Whoof! Almost as dull as the infernal old jail. Warmer, but almost as dismal. Wait till she comes back? Yes, certainly; but where is she gone, and how long will she be gone? No matter! Rigaud Lagnier Blandois, my amiable subject, you will get your money. You will enrich yourself. You have lived a gentleman; you will die a gentleman. You triumph, my little boy; but it is your character to triumph. Whoof!', 'Why are you encircling me?', 'I am sure as sane as any one here. I want to find the Marshalsea prison.', 'Why, John! What is it?', 'Nothing, father; only this lady not knowing her way, and being badgered by the boys. Who did you want, ma', 'Miss Dorrit. Is she here?', 'Mrs Clennam.', 'Mr Clennam', 'You see, the Marshal t you think you had better come up there, and let me bring Miss Dorrit?', 'Is it possible, Mrs Clennam, that you are so happily recovered as--', 'This is not recovery; it is not strength; I don  With an agitated wave of her hand, she put all that aside. ', 'Yes.', 'I reclaim it.', 'Have you any idea of its contents?', 'Read them.', 'You know, now, what I have done.', 'I think so. I am afraid so; though my mind is so hurried, and so sorry, and has so much to pity that it has not been able to follow all I have read,', 'I will restore to you what I have withheld from you. Forgive me. Can you forgive me?', 'I can, and Heaven knows I do! Do not kiss my dress and kneel to me; you are too old to kneel to me; I forgive you freely without that.', 'I have more yet to ask.', 'Not in that posture, It is unnatural to see your grey hair lower than mine. Pray rise; let me help you.', 'The great petition that I make to you (there is another which grows out of it), the great supplication that I address to your merciful and gentle heart, is, that you will not disclose this to Arthur until I am dead. If you think, when you have had time for consideration, that it can do him any good to know it while I am yet alive, then tell him. But you will not think that; and in such case, will you promise me to spare me until I am dead?', 'I am so sorry, and what I have read has so confused my thoughts, that I can scarcely give you a steady answer. If I should be quite sure that to be acquainted with it will do Mr Clennam no good--', 'I know you are attached to him, and will make him the first consideration. It is right that he should be the first consideration. I ask that. But, having regarded him, and still finding that you may spare me for the little time I shall remain on earth, will you do it?', 'I will.', 'GOD bless you!', 'You will wonder, perhaps, that I can better bear to be known to you whom I have wronged, than to the son of my enemy who wronged me.--For she did wrong me! She not only sinned grievously against the Lord, but she wronged me. What Arthur', 'No thought, can be quite a stranger to my heart, that springs out of the knowledge that Mr Clennam is always to be relied upon for being kind and generous and good.', 'I do not doubt it. Yet Arthur is, of the whole world, the one person from whom I would conceal this, while I am in it. I kept over him as a child, in the days of his first remembrance, my restraining and correcting hand. I was stern with him, knowing that the transgressions of the parents are visited on their offspring, and that there was an angry mark upon him at his birth. I have sat with him and his father, seeing the weakness of his father yearning to unbend to him; and forcing it back, that the child might work out his release in bondage and hardship. I have seen him, with his mother s ways that hardened me.', 'For his good. Not for the satisfaction of my injury. What was I, and what was the worth of that, before the curse of Heaven! I have seen that child grow up; not to be pious in a chosen way (his mother', 'Even now, I see _you_ shrink from me, as if I had been cruel.', 'I have done, what it was given to me to do. I have set myself against evil; not against good. I have been an instrument of severity against sin. Have not mere sinners like myself been commissioned to lay it low in all time?', 'In all time?', 'Even if my own wrong had prevailed with me, and my own vengeance had moved me, could I have found no justification? None in the old days when the innocent perished with the guilty, a thousand to one? When the wrath of the hater of the unrighteous was not slaked even in blood, and yet found favour?', 'O, Mrs Clennam, Mrs Clennam, angry feelings and unforgiving deeds are no comfort and no guide to you and me. My life has been passed in this poor prison, and my teaching has been very defective; but let me implore you to remember later and better days. Be guided only by the healer of the sick, the raiser of the dead, the friend of all who were afflicted and forlorn, the patient Master who shed tears of compassion for our infirmities. We cannot but be right if we put all the rest away, and do everything in remembrance of Him. There is no vengeance and no infliction of suffering in His life, I am sure. There can be no confusion in following Him, and seeking for no other footsteps, I am certain.', 'Hark! I said I had another petition. It is one that does not admit of delay. The man who brought you this packet and possesses these proofs, is now waiting at my house to be bought off. I can keep this from Arthur, only by buying him off. He asks a large sum; more than I can get together to pay him without having time. He refuses to make any abatement, because his threat is, that if he fails with me, he will come to you. Will you return with me and show him that you already know it? Will you return with me and try to prevail with him? Will you come and help me with him? Do not refuse what I ask in Arthur s sake!', 'What was that! Let us make haste in,', 'Mr Pancks, you have been remiss, you have been remiss, sir.', 'What do you mean by that?', 'I mean, Mr Pancks, that you must be sharper with the people, sharper with the people, much sharper with the people, sir. You don t squeeze them. Your receipts are not up to the mark. You must squeeze them, sir, or our connection will not continue to be as satisfactory as I could wish it to be to all parties. All parties.', '_Don em? What else am I made for?', 'You are made for nothing else, Mr Pancks. You are made to do your duty, but you don  The Patriarch so much surprised himself by this brilliant turn, after Dr Johnson, which he had not in the least expected or intended, that he laughed aloud; and repeated with great satisfaction, as he twirled his thumbs and nodded at his youthful portrait, ', 'Oh, Anything more?', 'Yes, sir, yes, sir. Something more. You will please, Mr Pancks, to squeeze the Yard again, the first thing on Monday morning.', 'Oh! Ain', 'Nonsense, sir. Not near the mark, not near the mark.', 'Oh! Anything more?', 'Yes, sir, yes, sir, something more. I am not at all pleased, Mr Pancks, with my daughter; not at all pleased. Besides calling much too often to inquire for Mrs Clennam, Mrs Clennam, who is not just now in circumstances that are by any means calculated to--to be satisfactory to all parties, she goes, Mr Pancks, unless I am much deceived, to inquire for Mr Clennam in jail. In jail.', 'He  said Pancks.  s kind.', 'Pooh, pooh, Mr Pancks. She has nothing to do with that, nothing to do with that. I can', 'You will please to mention to my daughter, Mr Pancks, that I can t allow it,', 'Oh! You couldn', 'No, sir, no; you are paid to mention it, and you must mention it to pay, mention it to pay.', 'Oh! Anything more?', 'Yes, sir. It appears to me, Mr Pancks, that you yourself are too often and too much in that direction, that direction. I recommend you, Mr Pancks, to dismiss from your attention both your own losses and other people', 'Not at present, sir, not at present. I am going, to take a little stroll, a little stroll. Perhaps I shall find you here when I come back. If not, sir, duty, duty; squeeze, squeeze, squeeze, on Monday; squeeze on Monday!', 'What do you pretend to be? What t it? You benevolent!', 'I have discharged myself from your service, that I may tell you what you are. You t know that I wouldn re a driver in disguise, a screwer by deputy, a wringer, and squeezer, and shaver by substitute. You re a shabby deceiver!', 'Ask these good people who ll tell you Pancks, I believe.', 'But I tell you, good people--Casby! This mound of meekness, this lump of love, this bottle-green smiler, this is your driver! If you want to see the man who would flay you alive--here he is! Don t know how much a year!', 'If you want to see the man who would flay you alive--here he is! Don t know how much a year!', 'Good! Hear Mr Pancks!', 'Hear Mr Pancks? Yes, I should think so! It s the Winder!', 'Here  said Pancks,  s the Proprietor, and here t know what a cheat the Proprietor is! What do you think of his showing himself to-night, that I may have all the blame on Monday? What do you think of his having had me over the coals this very evening, because I don', 'Shabby? Yes, I should think so! The lot that your Casby belongs to, is the shabbiest of all the lots. Setting their Grubbers on, at a wretched pittance, to do what they t half such a cheat as this sign-post of The Casby', 'And see what you get of these fellows, besides, See what more you get of these precious Humming-Tops, revolving among you with such smoothness that you em, or the little window in  t an agreeable style of chap, I know that very well.', 'I am, in general, a dry, uncomfortable, dreary Plodder and Grubber. That s his full-length portrait, painted by himself and presented to you, warranted a likeness! But what', 'Well, and neither will you find in Grubbers like myself, under Proprietors like this, pleasant qualities. I t been agreeable to myself, and I haven  time, this impostor would give me a shilling a week less; if as useful a man could be got at sixpence cheaper, he would be taken in my place at sixpence cheaper. Bargain and sale, bless you! Fixed principles! It s Head, but the real name of the House is the Sham  said Mr Pancks, breaking off and looking round, ', 'It  said Mr Pancks,   said Mr Pancks, closing upon his late Proprietor again, from whom he had withdrawn a little for the better display of him to the Yard; ', 'It  said Mr Meagles, clearing his throat; ', 'Why, the truth is, Miss Wade, it is possible that you may be able to throw a light upon a little something that is at present dark. Any unpleasant bygones between us are bygones, I hope. Can', 'That is not the subject you wished to enter on?', 'No, no, No. I thought your good nature might--', 'I thought you knew, that my good nature is not to be calculated upon?', 'Don  said Mr Meagles;   For he was sensible of having gained nothing by approaching it in a roundabout way. ', '--that you had some knowledge of one Blandois, lately killed in London by a violent accident. Now, don  said Mr Meagles, dexterously forestalling an angry interruption which he saw about to break.   Mr Meagles did he, on his way to England last time, leave a box of papers, or a bundle of papers, or some papers or other in some receptacle or other--any papers--with you: begging you to allow him to leave them here for a short time, until he wanted them?', 'The question is? Whose question is?', 'Mine, And not only mine but Clennam s question. Now, I am sure, that you can s impossible. Well! It', 'Upon my word, I seem to be a mark for everybody who knew anything of a man I once in my life hired, and paid, and dismissed, to aim their questions at!', 'Now, don  remonstrated Mr Meagles,  t! Don s the plainest question in the world, and might be asked of any one. The documents I refer to were not his own, were wrongfully obtained, might at some time or other be troublesome to an innocent person to have in keeping, and are sought by the people to whom they really belong. He passed through Calais going to London, and there were reasons why he should not take them with him then, why he should wish to be able to put his hand upon them readily, and why he should distrust leaving them with people of his own sort. Did he leave them here? I declare if I knew how to avoid giving you offence, I would take any pains to do it. I put the question personally, but there', 'No.', 'Then unfortunately, Miss Wade, you know nothing about them?', 'I know nothing about them. I have now answered your unaccountable question. He did not leave them here, and I know nothing about them.', 'There! I am sorry for it; that', 'Harriet well? O yes!', 'I have put my foot in it again, I can t think twice. Her old friend leaves a kind word for her, Miss Wade, if you should think proper to deliver it.', 'Eh? Good gracious! this is not Miss Dorrit! Why, Mother, look! Tattycoram!', 'Tatty!', 'What you wanted! Here it is! I was put in the next room not to see you. I heard you ask her about it, I heard her say she hadn', 'Why, my girl, how did you come over?', 'I came in the boat with you. I was sitting wrapped up at the other end. When you took a coach at the wharf, I took another coach and followed you here. She never would have given it up after what you had said to her about its being wanted; she would sooner have sunk it in the sea, or burnt it. But, here it is!', 'She never wanted it to be left, I must say that for her; but he left it, and I knew well that after what you said, and after her denying it, she never would have given it up. But here it is! Dear Master, dear Mistress, take me back again, and give me back the dear old name! Let this intercede for me. Here it is!', 'Oh! I have been so wretched, always so unhappy, and so repentant! I was afraid of her from the first time I saw her. I knew she had got a power over me through understanding what was bad in me so well. It was a madness in me, and she could raise it whenever she liked. I used to think, when I got into that state, that people were all against me because of my first beginning; and the kinder they were to me, the worse fault I found in them. I made it out that they triumphed above me, and that they wanted to make me envy them, when I know--when I even knew then--that they never thought of such a thing. And my beautiful young mistress not so happy as she ought to have been, and I gone away from her! Such a brute and a wretch as she must think me! But you  pleaded Tattycoram;   cried Tattycoram, in a closing great burst of distress,  ll try very hard. I won ll count five-and-twenty hundred, five-and-twenty thousand!', 'always so unhappy, and so repentant! I was afraid of her from the first time I saw her. I knew she had got a power over me through understanding what was bad in me so well. It was a madness in me, and she could raise it whenever she liked. I used to think, when I got into that state, that people were all against me because of my first beginning; and the kinder they were to me, the worse fault I found in them. I made it out that they triumphed above me, and that they wanted to make me envy them, when I know--when I even knew then--that they never thought of such a thing. And my beautiful young mistress not so happy as she ought to have been, and I gone away from her! Such a brute and a wretch as she must think me! But you  pleaded Tattycoram;   cried Tattycoram, in a closing great burst of distress,  ll try very hard. I won ll count five-and-twenty hundred, five-and-twenty thousand!', 'Now, my dear Miss Dorrit, I am a man of business--or at least was--and I am going to take my measures promptly, in that character. Had I better see Arthur to-night?', 'I think not to-night. I will go to his room and ascertain how he is. But I think it will be better not to see him to-night.', 'I am much of your opinion, my dear, and therefore I have not been any nearer to him than this dismal room. Then I shall probably not see him for some little time to come. But I', 'You see that young lady who was here just now--that little, quiet, fragile figure passing along there, Tatty? Look. The people stand out of the way to let her go by. The men--see the poor, shabby fellows--pull off their hats to her quite politely, and now she glides in at that doorway. See her, Tattycoram?', 'Yes, sir.', 'I have heard tell, Tatty, that she was once regularly called the child of this place. She was born here, and lived here many years. I can', 'Yes indeed, sir!', 'If she had constantly thought of herself, and settled with herself that everybody visited this place upon her, turned it against her, and cast it at her, she would have led an irritable and probably an useless existence. Yet I have heard tell, Tattycoram, that her young life has been one of active resignation, goodness, and noble service. Shall I tell you what I consider those eyes of hers, that were here just now, to have always looked at, to get that expression?', 'Yes, if you please, sir.', 'Duty, Tattycoram. Begin it early, and do it well; and there is no antecedent to it, in any origin or station, that will tell against us with the Almighty, or with ourselves.', 'Good! I have not a doubt that t be in better. I am off again to-morrow morning.', 'My dear, I can', 'How is that a reason for going off again to-morrow morning?', 'You shall understand, To-night we three will put up at a City Hotel. To-morrow morning, Mother and Tattycoram will go down to Twickenham, where Mrs Tickit, sitting attended by Dr Buchan in the parlour-window, will think them a couple of ghosts; and I shall go abroad again for Doyce. We must have Dan here. Now, I tell you, my love, it s nothing to me to go and find him. I em. Therefore I can t live without breathing freely; and I can', 'I don  said Mr Meagles.  s right, that _you_ should do homage to _me_--at the Marshalsea Gate.', 'You remind me of the days, but she', 'This will soon be over now, dear Mr Clennam. Not only are Mr Doyce', 'Dear girl. Dear heart. Good angel!', 'You praise me far too much. And yet it is such an exquisite pleasure to me to hear you speak so feelingly, and to--and to see, how deeply you mean it, that I cannot say Don', 'You have been here many, many times, when I have not seen you, Little Dorrit?', 'Yes, I have been here sometimes when I have not come into the room.', 'Very often?', 'Rather often,', 'Every day?', 'I think, that I have been here at least twice every day.', 'Dear Little Dorrit, it is not my imprisonment only that will soon be over. This sacrifice of you must be ended. We must learn to part again, and to take our different ways so wide asunder. You have not forgotten what we said together, when you came back?', 'O no, I have not forgotten it. But something has been--You feel quite strong to-day, don', 'Quite strong.', 'Do you feel quite strong enough to know what a great fortune I have got?', 'I shall be very glad to be told. No fortune can be too great or good for Little Dorrit.', 'I have been anxiously waiting to tell you. I have been longing and longing to tell you. You are sure you will not take it?', 'Never!', 'You are quite sure you will not take half of it?', 'Never, dear Little Dorrit!', 'You will be sorry to hear what I have to tell you about Fanny. Poor Fanny has lost everything. She has nothing left but her husband', 'Yes. It is all gone. I am very sorry for Fanny; very, very, very sorry for poor Fanny. My poor brother too!', 'Had _he_ property in the same hands?', 'Yes! And it', 'I have nothing in the world. I am as poor as when I lived here. When papa came over to England, he confided everything he had to the same hands, and it is all swept away. O my dearest and best, are you quite sure you will not share my fortune with me now?', 'Never to part, my dearest Arthur; never any more, until the last! I never was rich before, I never was proud before, I never was happy before, I am rich in being taken by you, I am proud in having been resigned by you, I am happy in being with you in this prison, as I should be happy in coming back to it with you, if it should be the will of GOD, and comforting and serving you with all my love and truth. I am yours anywhere, everywhere! I love you dearly! I would rather pass my life here with you, and go out daily, working for our bread, than I would have the greatest fortune that ever was told, and be the greatest lady that ever was honoured. O, if poor papa may only know how blest at last my heart is, in this room where he suffered for so many years!', 'Painfully aware, Miss Dorrit, I am sure, that to propose an adjournment to any place to one so far removed by fortune and so courted and caressed by the best society must ever appear intruding even if not a pie-shop far below your present sphere and a back-parlour though a civil man but if for the sake of Arthur--cannot overcome it more improper now than ever late Doyce and Clennam--one last remark I might wish to make one last explanation I might wish to offer perhaps your good nature might excuse under pretence of three kidney ones the humble place of conversation.', 'If Fancy  she began, ', 'Call it not kindness, for you always were the best and dearest little thing that ever was if I may take the liberty and even in a money point of view a saving being Conscience itself though I must add much more agreeable than mine ever was to me for though not I hope more burdened than other people t desert him in his misfortunes but that I came backwards and forwards constantly to ask if I could do anything for him and that I sat in the pie-shop where they very civilly fetched something warm in a tumbler from the hotel and really very nice hours after hours to keep him company over the way without his knowing it.', 'Over and above which, I earnestly beg you as the dearest thing that ever was if you t know after all whether it wasn', 'The withered chaplet my dear, is then perished the column is crumbled and the pyramid is standing upside down upon its what', 'Bring him for ll chuck him out o', 'Bring him for ll chuck him out o  Having reiterated this demand an immense number of times, with a sustained glare of defiance at Little Dorrit, Mr F. he brought for', 'Dear Arthur, I have some one here. May I bring some one in?', 'Yes,', 'Now I am all right, Now it', 'I did, but Amy told me--', 'Little Dorrit. Never any other name.', '--But my Little Dorrit told me that, without asking for any further explanation, I was not to expect you until I saw you.', 'And now you see me, my boy, and now you shall have any explanation and every explanation. The fact is, I _was_ here--came straight to you from the Allongers and Marshongers, or I should be ashamed to look you in the face this day,--but you were not in company trim at the moment, and I had to start off again to catch Doyce.', 'Poor Doyce!', 'Don t deserve, _He s_ doing well enough. Doyce is a wonderful fellow over there. I assure you he is making out his case like a house a-fire. He has fallen on his legs, has Dan. Where they don em, that man em, that man t have occasion to trouble the Circumlocution Office any more. Let me tell you, Dan has done without ', 'What a load you take from my mind! What happiness you give me!', 'Happiness? Don s no public offender, bless you, now! He t-know-what all t talk about that over here.', 'Why not?', 'Oh, egad! he must hide all those things under lock and key when he comes over here. They won t give her children such distinctions herself, and won  said Mr Meagles, shaking his head again.  t do here!', 'If you had brought me (except for Doyce  cried Arthur, ', 'Why, of course, of course, Of course I know that, my good fellow, and therefore I come out with it in the first burst. Now, to go back, about catching Doyce. I caught Doyce. Ran against him among a lot of those dirty brown dogs in women em, calling themselves Arabs and all sorts of incoherent races. _You_ know ', 'Doyce in England!', 'There! I am the worst man in the world to manage a thing of this sort. I don', 'There are only three branches of my subject, my dear Clennam, and they s thirdly. But you know we always make an allowance for friction, and so I have reserved space to close in. My dear Clennam, I thoroughly confide in you; you have it in your power to be quite as useful to me as I have, or have had, it in my power to be useful to you; your old place awaits you, and wants you very much; there is nothing to detain you here one half-hour longer.', 'I made a remark a little while ago, which I am inclined to think was an incorrect one. I said there was nothing to detain you here, Clennam, half an hour longer. Am I mistaken in supposing that you would rather not leave here till to-morrow morning? Do I know, without being very wise, where you would like to go, direct from these walls and from this room?', 'You do, It has been our cherished purpose.', 'Very well! Then, if this young lady will do me the honour of regarding me for four-and-twenty hours in the light of a father, and will take a ride with me now towards Saint Paul', 'I think, Arthur, you will not want Mother and me in the morning and we will keep away. It might set Mother thinking about Pet; she s best at the Cottage, and I', 'My dear love, Why does Maggy light the fire? We shall be gone directly.', 'I asked her to do it. I have taken such an odd fancy. I want you to burn something for me.', 'What?', 'Only this folded paper. If you will put it in the fire with your own hand, just as it is, my fancy will be gratified.', 'Superstitious, darling Little Dorrit? Is it a charm?', 'It is anything you like best, my own, if you will only humour me when the fire burns up.', 'Speculate with it,', 'Spec--u--late, my dear?', 'Why not?', 'Because, my dear, if we SHOULD lose it, if we SHOULD lose it, we shall no longer be able to live, my dear.', 'Fiddle,', 'I am not altogether sure of that, my dear,', 'There  pursued the lady,  s time he was in the way of doing something for himself; and Kate too, poor girl, without a penny in the world. Think of your brother! Would he be what he is, if he hadn', 'That  replied Mr. Nickleby. ', 'The very house I live in, may be taken from me tomorrow. Not an article of my old furniture, but will be sold to strangers!', 'Cheer up, sir!', 'You mustn', 'Such things happen every day,', 'And it is very sinful to rebel against them,', 'And what no man with a family ought to do,', 'Was that half-past twelve, Noggs?', 'Not more than five-and-twenty minutes by the-- regular time.', 'My watch has stopped, I don', 'Not wound up,', 'Yes it is,', 'Over-wound then,', 'That can', 'Must be,', 'Well! perhaps it is.', 'perhaps it is.', 'I am going to the London Tavern this morning,', 'Public meeting?', 'The bell, At home?', 'Yes.', 'To anybody?', 'Yes.', 'To the tax-gatherer?', 'No! Let him call again.', 'My dear Nickleby, there s all night, has just gone home to put a clean shirt on, and take a bottle or two of soda water, and will certainly be with us, in time to address the meeting. He is a little excited by last night, but never mind that; he always speaks the stronger for it.', 'It seems to promise pretty well,', 'Pretty well! It', 'And when they ARE at a premium,', 'When they are, you know what to do with them as well as any man alive, and how to back quietly out at the right time, By-the-bye, what a VERY remarkable man that clerk of yours is.', 'Yes, poor devil! Though Newman Noggs kept his horses and hounds once.', 'Ay, ay?', 'Yes, and not many years ago either; but he squandered his money, invested it anyhow, borrowed at interest, and in short made first a thorough fool of himself, and then a beggar. He took to drinking, and had a touch of paralysis, and then came here to borrow a pound, as in his better days I had--', 'Done business with him,', 'Just so, I couldn', 'Oh, of course not.', 'But as I wanted a clerk just then, to open the door and so forth, I took him out of charity, and he has remained with me ever since. He is a little mad, I think, but he is useful enough, poor creature--useful enough.', 'but he is useful enough, poor creature--useful enough.', 'Hear! Chair, gentlemen, chair!', 'Walker, Ferguson, Is Murphy right?', 'Ah! Newman, The letter about the mortgage has come, has it? I thought it would.', 'The letter about the mortgage has come, has it? I thought it would.', 'Wrong,', 'What! and nobody called respecting it?', 'What HAS come, then?', 'I have,', 'What else?', 'This, Post-mark, Strand, black wax, black border, woman', 'Post-mark, Strand, black wax, black border, woman', 'Black wax? I know something of that hand, too. Newman, I shouldn', 'I don', 'Why not, sir?', 'You never are surprised, that', 'It is as I expected, Newman, He IS dead. Dear me! Well, that t have thought it, really.', 'Children alive?', 'Why, that  replied Mr. Nickleby, as though his thoughts were about them at that moment. ', 'Both!', 'And the widow, too, and all three in London, confound them; all three here, Newman.', 'Go home!', 'Reasonable, certainly! very reasonable! My brother never did anything for me, and I never expected it; the breath is no sooner out of his body than I am to be looked to, as the support of a great hearty woman, and a grown boy and girl. What are they to me! I never saw them.', 'Is Mrs. Nickleby at home, girl?', 'Her name ain  said the girl, ', 'Mrs. Nickleby,', 'It  said the same voice; ', 'Somebody went out just now, but I think it was the attic which had been a cleaning of himself,', 'You had better see, Show the gentleman where the bell is, and tell him he mustn t allow a knock except when the bell', 'Here, I beg your pardon; is that Mrs. La what', 'Creevy--La Creevy,', 'I am, with your leave,', 'Hem! A miniature, I presume. A very strongly-marked countenance for the purpose, sir. Have you ever sat before?', 'You mistake my purpose, I see, ma  replied Mr. Nickleby, in his usual blunt fashion.  am, and nobody to give one to (thank God) if I had. Seeing you on the stairs, I wanted to ask a question of you, about some lodgers here.', 'I infer from what you said to your servant, that the floor above belongs to you, ma', 'A widow, ma', 'Yes, she is a widow,', 'A POOR widow, ma', 'Well, I', 'I happen to know that she is, ma  said Ralph.  am?', 'Very true, Exceedingly true.', 'I know her circumstances intimately, ma  said Ralph;  am.', 'I should hope, if there was any incompatibility to meet the pecuniary obligations, that the lady', 'No they wouldn am, Don', 'If I am to understand that, the case wears a very different appearance.', 'You may understand it then, ma  said Ralph,  am--at least, I believe I am the only relation they have, and I think it right that you should know I can', 'Only from week to week, Mrs. Nickleby paid the first week in advance.', 'Then you had better get them out at the end of it, They can am; they are in everybody', 'They can am; they are in everybody', 'Certainly, if Mrs. Nickleby took the apartments without the means of paying for them, it was very unbecoming a lady.', 'Of course it was, ma', 'And naturally, I who am, AT PRESENT--hem--an unprotected female, cannot afford to lose by the apartments.', 'Of course you can am,', 'Though at the same time, I have nothing whatever to say against the lady, who is extremely pleasant and affable, though, poor thing, she seems terribly low in her spirits; nor against the young people either, for nicer, or better-behaved young people cannot be.', 'Very well, ma  said Ralph, turning to the door, for these encomiums on poverty irritated him; ', 'I am sure I am very much obliged to you at least, sir, Would you do me the favour to look at a few specimens of my portrait painting?', 'You am, but as I have a visit to pay upstairs, and my time is precious, I really can', 'At any other time when you are passing, I shall be most happy, Perhaps you will have the kindness to take a card of terms with you? Thank you--good-morning!', 'Good-morning, ma  said Ralph, shutting the door abruptly after him to prevent any further conversation. ', 'What name?', 'Nickleby,', 'Oh! Mrs. Nickleby, here', 'Oh, you are Nicholas, I suppose?', 'That is my name, sir,', 'Put my hat down, Well, ma am; I always do.', 'Mine was no common loss!', 'It was no UNcommon loss, ma  returned Ralph, as he coolly unbuttoned his spencer.  am, and wives too.', 'And brothers also, sir,', 'Yes, sir, and puppies, and pug-dogs likewise, You didn s complaint was, ma', 'The doctors could attribute it to no particular disease, We have too much reason to fear that he died of a broken heart.', 'Pooh! there s dying of a broken neck, or suffering from a broken arm, or a broken head, or a broken leg, or a broken nose; but a broken heart!--nonsense, it t pay his debts, he dies of a broken heart, and his widow', 'Some people, I believe, have no hearts to break,', 'How old is this boy, for God', 'Nicholas is very nearly nineteen,', 'Nineteen, eh! and what do you mean to do for your bread, sir?', 'Not to live upon my mother,', 'You', 'Whatever it be, I shall not look to you to make it more.', 'Nicholas, my dear, recollect yourself,', 'Dear Nicholas, pray,', 'Hold your tongue, sir, Upon my word! Fine beginnings, Mrs Nickleby--fine beginnings!', 'a boy.', 'Well, ma  said Ralph, impatiently,  s nothing left for you?', 'Nothing,', 'And you spent what little money you had, in coming all the way to London, to see what I could do for you?', 'I hoped, that you might have an opportunity of doing something for your brother', 'I don  muttered Ralph, walking up and down the room,  s. What is your daughter fit for, ma', 'but whenever a man dies without any property of his own, he always seems to think he has a right to dispose of other people am?', 'Kate has been well educated, Tell your uncle, my dear, how far you went in French and extras.', 'We must try and get you apprenticed at some boarding-school, You have not been brought up too delicately for that, I hope?', 'No, indeed, uncle, I will try to do anything that will gain me a home and bread.', 'Well, well, s beauty or her distress (stretch a point, and say the latter). ', 'No,', 'No, I thought not! This is the way my brother brought up his children, ma', 'Nicholas has not long completed such education as his poor father could give him, and he was thinking of--', 'Of making something of him someday, The old story; always thinking, and never doing. If my brother had been a man of activity and prudence, he might have left you a rich woman, ma t as old as that boy by a year and a half, he would have been in a situation to help you, instead of being a burden upon you, and increasing your distress. My brother was a thoughtless, inconsiderate man, Mrs. Nickleby, and nobody, I am sure, can have better reason to feel that, than you.', 'Are you willing to work, sir?', 'Of course I am,', 'Then see here, sir, This caught my eye this morning, and you may thank your stars for it.', '"EDUCATION.--At Mr. Wackford Squeers', 'There! Let him get that situation, and his fortune is made.', 'But he is not a Master of Arts,', 'That, that, I think, can be got over.', 'But the salary is so small, and it is such a long way off, uncle!', 'Hush, Kate my dear, your uncle must know best.', 'I say, let him get that situation, and his fortune is made. If he don ll give him a thousand pounds. At least, I would if I had it.', 'Poor fellow! Oh! uncle, must we be separated so soon!', 'Don  said Mrs. Nickleby. ', 'Yes, mother, yes, If I am fortunate enough to be appointed to this post, sir, for which I am so imperfectly qualified, what will become of those I leave behind?', 'Your mother and sister, sir, will be provided for, in that case (not otherwise), by me, and placed in some sphere of life in which they will be able to be independent. That will be my immediate care; they will not remain as they are, one week after your departure, I will undertake.', 'Then, s hand, ', 'I am ready to do anything you wish me. Let us try our fortune with Mr Squeers at once; he can but refuse.', 'He won  said Ralph.  ll rise to be a partner in the establishment in no time. Bless me, only think! if he were to die, why your fortune', 'To be sure, I see it all, Or suppose some young nobleman who is being educated at the Hall, were to take a fancy to me, and get his father to appoint me his travelling tutor when he left, and when we come back from the continent, procured me some handsome appointment. Eh! uncle?', 'Ah, to be sure!', 'And who knows, but when he came to see me when I was settled (as he would of course), he might fall in love with Kate, who would be keeping my house, and--and marry her, eh! uncle? Who knows?', 'Who, indeed!', 'How happy we should be! The pain of parting is nothing to the joy of meeting again. Kate will be a beautiful woman, and I so proud to hear them say so, and mother so happy to be with us once again, and all these sad times forgotten, and--', 'Half-past three, There will be nobody here today.', 'At Midsummer, I took down ten boys; ten twenties is two hundred pound. I go back at eight o s come of all the boys? what', 'Halloa, sir! What', 'Nothing, please sir,', 'Nothing, sir!', 'Please sir, I sneezed,', 'Oh! sneezed, did you? Then what did you say "nothing" for, sir?', 'Wait till I get you down into Yorkshire, my young gentleman, and then I', 'Ye--ye--yes,', 'Then do so at once, sir, Do you hear?', 'Mr. Squeers, here', 'Show the gentleman in, Richard, Put your handkerchief in your pocket, you little scoundrel, or I', 'Put your handkerchief in your pocket, you little scoundrel, or I', 'My dear child, all people have their trials. This early trial of yours that is fit to make your little heart burst, and your very eyes come out of your head with crying, what is it? Nothing; less than nothing. You are leaving your friends, but you will have a father in me, my dear, and a mother in Mrs. Squeers. At the delightful village of Dotheboys, near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, where youth are boarded, clothed, booked, washed, furnished with pocket-money, provided with all necessaries--', 'It IS the gentleman, Mr. Squeers, I believe, sir?', 'The same, sir,', 'The gentleman, that advertised in the Times newspaper?', '--Morning Post, Chronicle, Herald, and Advertiser, regarding the Academy called Dotheboys Hall at the delightful village of Dotheboys, near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, You come on business, sir. I see by my young friends. How do you do, my little gentleman? and how do you do, sir?', 'I am in the oil and colour way. My name is Snawley, sir,', 'It is not for me to say so, sir, but I don', 'Hem! Twenty pounds per annewum, I believe, Mr Squeers?', 'Guineas,', 'Pounds for two, I think, Mr. Squeers,', 'I don  replied Squeers, as if he had never considered the proposition before. ', 'They are not great eaters,', 'Oh! that doesn  replied Squeers.  t consider the boys', 'Every wholesome luxury, sir, that Yorkshire can afford, every beautiful moral that Mrs. Squeers can instil; every--in short, every comfort of a home that a boy could wish for, will be theirs, Mr. Snawley.', 'I should wish their morals to be particularly attended to,', 'I am glad of that, sir, They have come to the right shop for morals, sir.', 'They have come to the right shop for morals, sir.', 'You are a moral man yourself,', 'I rather believe I am, sir,', 'I have the satisfaction to know you are, sir, I asked one of your references, and he said you were pious.', 'Well, sir, I hope I am a little in that line,', 'I hope I am also, Could I say a few words with you in the next box?', 'By all means, My dears, will you speak to your new playfellow a minute or two? That is one of my boys, sir. Belling his name is,--a Taunton boy that, sir.', 'Is he, indeed?', 'He goes down with me tomorrow, sir, That', 'A razor! What for?', 'To shave with,', 'Up to what age do you keep boys at your school then?', 'Just as long as their friends make the quarterly payments to my agent in town, or until such time as they run away, Let us understand each other; I see we may safely do so. What are these boys;--natural children?', 'No, s one eye.  t.', 'They ain', 'I thought they might be, We have a good many of them; that boy', 'Him in the next box?', 'He is, But about these boys of yours; you wanted to speak to me?', 'Yes, The fact is, I am not their father, Mr. Squeers. I', 'Oh! Is that it? That explains it at once. I was wondering what the devil you were going to send them to Yorkshire for. Ha! ha! Oh, I understand now.', 'You see I have married the mother, it', 'I see,', 'And this, has made me anxious to put them to some school a good distance off, where there are no holidays--none of those ill-judged coming home twice a year that unsettle children', 'The payments regular, and no questions asked,', 'That  rejoined the other. ', 'Strictly,', 'Not too much writing home allowed, I suppose?', 'None, except a circular at Christmas, to say they never were so happy, and hope they may never be sent for,', 'Nothing could be better,', 'Then, as we understand each other, will you allow me to ask you whether you consider me a highly virtuous, exemplary, and well-conducted man in private life; and whether, as a person whose business it is to take charge of youth, you place the strongest confidence in my unimpeachable integrity, liberality, religious principles, and ability?', 'Certainly I do,', 'Perhaps you won', 'Not the least in the world.', 'That  said Squeers, taking up a pen;  s what I like.', 'Here he is, what is it?', 'Only a matter of business, sir, There was an advertisement of yours in the papers this morning?', 'There was, sir. This way, if you please, Won', 'Why, I think I will, This is my nephew, sir, Mr Nicholas Nickleby.', 'How do you do, sir?', 'Perhaps you recollect me?', 'You paid me a small account at each of my half-yearly visits to town, for some years, I think, sir,', 'I did,', 'For the parents of a boy named Dorker, who unfortunately--', '--unfortunately died at Dotheboys Hall,', 'I remember very well, sir, Ah! Mrs. Squeers, sir, was as partial to that lad as if he had been her own; the attention, sir, that was bestowed upon that boy in his illness! Dry toast and warm tea offered him every night and morning when he couldn t regret it though. It is a pleasant thing to reflect that one did one', 'These are only some pupils of mine, This gentleman, sir, is a parent who is kind enough to compliment me upon the course of education adopted at Dotheboys Hall, which is situated, sir, at the delightful village of Dotheboys, near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, where youth are boarded, clothed, booked, washed, furnished with pocket-money--', 'Yes, we know all about that, sir, It', 'You are very right, sir; it IS in the advertisement,', 'And in the matter of fact besides, I feel bound to assure you, sir, and I am proud to have this opportunity OF assuring you, that I consider Mr. Squeers a gentleman highly virtuous, exemplary, well conducted, and--', 'I make no doubt of it, sir, no doubt of it at all. Suppose we come to business?', 'With all my heart, sir, "Never postpone business," is the very first lesson we instil into our commercial pupils. Master Belling, my dear, always remember that; do you hear?', 'Yes, sir,', 'He recollects what it is, does he?', 'Tell the gentleman,', '"Never,"', 'Very good, go on.', 'Never,', 'Very good indeed, Yes.', 'P,', 'Perform--business! Never--perform--business!', 'Very well, sir, You and I will perform a little business on our private account by-and-by.', 'You and I will perform a little business on our private account by-and-by.', 'And just now, we had better transact our own, perhaps.', 'If you please,', 'Well, it', 'Precisely so,', 'And you really want one?', 'Certainly,', 'Here he is! My nephew Nicholas, hot from school, with everything he learnt there, fermenting in his head, and nothing fermenting in his pocket, is just the man you want.', 'I am afraid, s figure,  t suit me.', 'Yes, he will, I know better. Don s time, unless this gentleman is more obstinate than I take him to be.', 'I fear, sir, that you object to my youth, and to my not being a Master of Arts?', 'The absence of a college degree IS an objection,', 'Look here, sir, I', 'If you', 'This is a boy, or a youth, or a lad, or a young man, or a hobbledehoy, or whatever you like to call him, of eighteen or nineteen, or thereabouts,', 'That I see,', 'So do I,', 'His father is dead, he is wholly ignorant of the world, has no resources whatever, and wants something to do, I recommend him to this splendid establishment of yours, as an opening which will lead him to fortune if he turns it to proper account. Do you see that?', 'Everybody must see that,', 'I do, of course,', 'He does, of course, you observe, If any caprice of temper should induce him to cast aside this golden opportunity before he has brought it to perfection, I consider myself absolved from extending any assistance to his mother and sister. Look at him, and think of the use he may be to you in half-a-dozen ways! Now, the question is, whether, for some time to come at all events, he won t that a question for consideration?', 'Yes, it is,', 'Good, Let me have two words with you.', 'Your uncle', 'He is an odd-looking man, What of that? Porson was an odd-looking man, and so was Doctor Johnson; all these bookworms are.', 'At eight o  said Squeers, ', 'Certainly, sir,', 'And your fare down, I have paid, So, you', 'I shall be here in the morning to see you fairly off, No skulking!', 'Thank you, sir, I never shall forget this kindness.', 'Take care you don  replied his uncle. ', 'Certainly, I can easily inquire.', 'Leave these papers with my clerk, then, and tell him to wait till I come home.', 'What', 'Papers from my uncle, and you', 'Uncle!', 'Mr. Nickleby,', 'Come in,', 'There is no answer,', 'No answer,', 'But, what', 'Is that you, Hannah?', 'It is I, Miss La Creevy,', 'Bless us! You', 'So are you,', 'It  returned the lady.  m waiting for the light to carry out an idea.', 'To carry out an idea, and that', 'Does it take long to get a nose, now?', 'Why, that depends in a great measure on the pattern, Snubs and Romans are plentiful enough, and there are flats of all sorts and sizes when there', 'Indeed! If I should meet with any in my travels, I', 'You don s weather, Mr. Nickleby? I heard something of it last night.', 'I heard something of it last night.', 'I do, indeed, Needs must, you know, when somebody drives. Necessity is my driver, and that is only another name for the same gentleman.', 'Well, I am very sorry for it; that  said Miss La Creevy;  s and sister Ah! she', 'Ah! she', 'If you ever have an opportunity of showing Kate some little kindness, I think you will.', 'Depend upon that, and God bless you, Mr. Nickleby; and I wish you well.', 'This is twopenn', 'That orth, sir,', 'What a rare article milk is, to be sure, in London! Just fill that mug up with lukewarm water, William, will you?', 'To the wery top, sir? Why, the milk will be drownded.', 'Never you mind that, Serve it right for being so dear. You ordered that thick bread and butter for three, did you?', 'Coming directly, sir.', 'You needn  said Squeers;  s plenty of time. Conquer your passions, boys, and don', 'Sit down, Mr. Nickleby, Here we are, a breakfasting you see!', 'Oh! that  said Squeers.  t forget the bread and butter presently.', 'Ah! here t it, Mr. Nickleby?', 'Very shocking, sir,', 'When I say number one, the boy on the left hand nearest the window may take a drink; and when I say number two, the boy next him will go in, and so till we come to number five, which is the last boy. Are you ready?', 'Yes, sir,', 'That  said Squeers, calmly getting on with his breakfast;  ve conquered human natur. This is the way we inculcate strength of mind, Mr. Nickleby,', 'keep ready till I tell you to begin. Subdue your appetites, my dears, and you', 'Thank God for a good breakfast, Number one may take a drink.', 'Number one may take a drink.', 'And now, you had better look sharp with your breakfast, for the horn will blow in a minute or two, and then every boy leaves off.', 'I thought it wouldn  said Squeers, jumping up and producing a little basket from under the seat;  t had time to eat, in here, boys! You', 'Oh! here you are, sir! Here are your mother and sister, sir.', 'Where?', 'Here! Having too much money and nothing at all to do with it, they were paying a hackney coach as I came up, sir.', 'We were afraid of being too late to see him before he went away from us,', 'Very good, ma  returned Ralph,  re the best judge of course. I merely said that you were paying a hackney coach. I never pay a hackney coach, ma t been in a hackney coach of my own hiring, for thirty years, and I hope I shan', 'I should never have forgiven myself if I had not seen him, Poor dear boy--going away without his breakfast too, because he feared to distress us!', 'Mighty fine certainly, When I first went to business, ma porth of milk for my breakfast as I walked to the city every morning; what do you say to that, ma', 'Now, Nickleby, I think you m afraid of one of them boys falling off and then there', 'Dear Nicholas, s arm, ', 'Eh! Do you wish to be introduced to Mr. Squeers, my dear?', 'That the schoolmaster! No, uncle. Oh no!', 'I  retorted Ralph in his cold sarcastic manner.  s my niece: Nicholas', 'Very glad to make your acquaintance, miss, I wish Mrs. Squeers took gals, and we had you for a teacher. I don t grow jealous if we had. Ha! ha! ha!', 'My dear Nicholas, who is this man? What kind of place can it be that you are going to?', 'I hardly know, Kate, s hand.  s all.', 'But this person,', 'Is my employer, or master, or whatever the proper name may be, and I was an ass to take his coarseness ill. They are looking this way, and it is time I was in my place. Bless you, love, and goodbye! Mother, look forward to our meeting again someday! Uncle, farewell! Thank you heartily for all you have done and all you mean to do. Quite ready, sir!', 'What', 'Hush! Take it. Read it. Nobody knows. That', 'Stop!', 'No,', 'If we put some of these youngsters in the middle, they', 'they', 'If you  replied Squeers,  ll be the very thing. Mr. Nickleby, take three of them boys between you and the gentleman. Belling and the youngest Snawley can sit between me and the guard. Three children, books as two.', 'I have not the least objection I am sure, I have a brother who wouldn s or baker', 'Six children, sir?', 'Yes, and all boys,', 'Mr. Nickleby, catch hold of that basket. Let me give you a card, sir, of an establishment where those six boys can be brought up in an enlightened, liberal, and moral manner, with no mistake at all about it, for twenty guineas a year each--twenty guineas, sir--or I', 'Oh! you are the Mr. Squeers mentioned here, I presume?', 'Yes, I am, sir, Mr. Wackford Squeers is my name, and I s one of my assistants, sir--Mr. Nickleby, a gentleman t do things by halves at our shop. All manner of learning my boys take down, sir; the expense is never thought of; and they get paternal treatment and washing in.', 'Upon my word, these are advantages indeed.', 'You may say that, sir, The most unexceptionable references are given and required. I wouldn t responsible for the payment of five pound five a quarter, no, not if you went down on your knees, and asked me, with the tears running down your face, to do it.', 'Highly considerate,', 'It  rejoined Squeers.  t leave off chattering your teeth, and shaking with the cold, I s time.', 'Snawley, junior, if you don ll warm you with a severe thrashing in about half a minute', 'Sit fast here, genelmen,', 'All right behind there, Dick?', 'All right, Off she goes!', 'Wo ho!  heads.   a hond here? Keep quiet, dang ye! Wo ho!', 'What', 'Matther mun, matter eneaf for one neight, dang the wall-eyed bay, he  glory I think, carse t t ye len d ha', 'Here! I m only a little abroad, that', 'Hoold   cried the guard,  em sumhoo. Well deane, my lod. That em goa noo. Dang  ll gang whoam fast eneaf!', 'Can you blo', 'I dare say I can,', 'Then just blo un as lies on the grund, fit to wakken the deead, will  said the man,   this here squealing inside. Cumin . Dean', 'Well, Mr. Nickleby, you did very right to catch hold of them horses. I should have done it myself if I had come to in time, but I am very glad you did it. You did it very well; very well.', 'So well, that if they had not been firmly checked when they were, you would most probably have had no brains left to teach with.', 'I am very glad to have escaped, of course, every man is glad when he escapes from danger; but if any one of my charges had been hurt--if I had been prevented from restoring any one of these little boys to his parents whole and sound as I received him--what would have been my feelings? Why the wheel a-top of my head would have been far preferable to it.', 'Are they all brothers, sir? Davy', 'Davy', 'In one sense they are, ma  replied Squeers, diving into his greatcoat pocket for cards.  em. Mr. Nickleby, hand the lady them cards, and offer these to the gentleman. Perhaps they might know of some parents that would be glad to avail themselves of the establishment.', 'I hope you suffer no inconvenience from the overturn, ma', 'No bodily inconvenience,', 'No mental inconvenience, I hope?', 'The subject is a very painful one to my feelings, sir, and I beg you as a gentleman, not to refer to it.', 'Dear me, I merely intended to inquire--', 'I hope no inquiries will be made, or I shall be compelled to throw myself on the protection of the other gentlemen. Landlord, pray direct a boy to keep watch outside the door--and if a green chariot passes in the direction of Grantham, to stop it instantly.', 'As the guard has gone on horseback to Grantham to get another coach, and as he must be gone a couple of hours at the very least, I propose a bowl of hot punch. What say you, sir?', 'I cannot indeed,', 'That  said the owner of the good-humoured countenance. ', 'Perhaps the lady would not object, Some little Italian thing out of the last opera brought out in town, would be most acceptable I am sure.', 'I would if I could, for I hold that in this, as in all other cases where people who are strangers to each other are thrown unexpectedly together, they should endeavour to render themselves as pleasant, for the joint sake of the little community, as possible.', 'I wish the maxim were more generally acted on, in all cases,', 'I  returned the other.  t sing, you', 'Nay. I should ask you.', 'After you, I will, with pleasure.', 'Indeed!', 'You may seek in vain, now, for the spot on which these sisters lived, for their very names have passed away, and dusty antiquaries tell of them as of a fable. But they dwelt in an old wooden house--old even in those days--with overhanging gables and balconies of rudely-carved oak, which stood within a pleasant orchard, and was surrounded by a rough stone wall, whence a stout archer might have winged an arrow to St Mary', 'With eyes bent upon the ground, then, or only raised enough to prevent his stumbling over such obstacles as lay in his way, the religious man moved slowly forward until he reached a small postern in the wall of the sisters', '"Save you, fair daughters!" said the friar; and fair in truth they were. Even a monk might have loved them as choice masterpieces of his Maker', '"Father," urged the maiden, pausing, as did each of the others, in her busy task, "we have prayed at matins, our daily alms have been distributed at the gate, the sick peasants have been tended,--all our morning tasks have been performed. I hope our occupation is a blameless one?', 'The four elder sisters cast down their eyes as if abashed by the holy man', '"Never, sisters," cried Alice. "Barter not the light and air of heaven, and the freshness of earth and all the beautiful things which breathe upon it, for the cold cloister and the cell. Nature', 'The tears fell fast from the maiden', 'The sisters, as with one accord, cried that their lot was cast together, and that there were dwellings for peace and virtue beyond the convent', '"Stay!" said the monk, raising his right hand in the air, and directing an angry glance by turns at Alice and the eldest sister. "Stay, and hear from me what these recollections are, which you would cherish above eternity, and awaken--if in mercy they slumbered--by means of idle toys. The memory of earthly things is charged, in after life, with bitter disappointment, affliction, death; with dreary change and wasting sorrow. The time will one day come, when a glance at those unmeaning baubles will tear open deep wounds in the hearts of some among you, and strike to your inmost souls. When that hour arrives--and, mark me, come it will--turn from the world to which you clung, to the refuge which you spurned. Find me the cell which shall be colder than the fire of mortals grows, when dimmed by calamity and trial, and there weep for the dreams of youth. These things are Heaven', 'But nature will smile though priests may frown, and next day the sun shone brightly, and on the next, and the next again. And in the morning', 'Time passed away as a tale that is told; faster indeed than many tales that are told, of which number I fear this may be one. The house of the five sisters stood where it did, and the same trees cast their pleasant shade upon the orchard grass. The sisters too were there, and lovely as at first, but a change had come over their dwelling. Sometimes, there was the clash of armour, and the gleaming of the moon on caps of steel; and, at others, jaded coursers were spurred up to the gate, and a female form glided hurriedly forth, as if eager to demand tidings of the weary messenger. A goodly train of knights and ladies lodged one night within the abbey walls, and next day rode away, with two of the fair sisters among them. Then, horsemen began to come less frequently, and seemed to bring bad tidings when they did, and at length they ceased to come at all, and footsore peasants slunk to the gate after sunset, and did their errand there, by stealth. Once, a vassal was dispatched in haste to the abbey at dead of night, and when morning came, there were sounds of woe and wailing in the sisters', 'There was a sullen darkness in the sky, and the sun had gone angrily down, tinting the dull clouds with the last traces of his wrath, when the same black monk walked slowly on, with folded arms, within a stone', 'No longer were the friar', 'And could they, remembering how her young heart had sickened at the thought of cloistered walls, look upon her grave, in garbs which would chill the very ashes within it? Could they bow down in prayer, and when all Heaven turned to hear them, bring the dark shade of sadness on one angel', 'They sent abroad, to artists of great celebrity in those times, and having obtained the church', 'That stone has worn away and been replaced by others, and many generations have come and gone since then. Time has softened down the colours, but the same stream of light still falls upon the forgotten tomb, of which no trace remains; and, to this day, the stranger is shown in York Cathedral, an old window called the Five Sisters.', 'That', 'It is a tale of life, and life is made up of such sorrows,', 'There are shades in all good pictures, but there are lights too, if we choose to contemplate them, The youngest sister in your tale was always light-hearted.', 'The youngest sister in your tale was always light-hearted.', 'And died early,', 'She would have died earlier, perhaps, had she been less happy, Do you think the sisters who loved her so well, would have grieved the less if her life had been one of gloom and sadness? If anything could soothe the first sharp pain of a heavy loss, it would be--with me--the reflection, that those I mourned, by being innocently happy here, and loving all about them, had prepared themselves for a purer and happier world. The sun does not shine upon this fair earth to meet frowning eyes, depend upon it.', 'I believe you are right,', 'Believe! can anybody doubt it? Take any subject of sorrowful regret, and see with how much pleasure it is associated. The recollection of past pleasure may become pain--', 'It does,', 'Well; it does. To remember happiness which cannot be restored, is pain, but of a softened kind. Our recollections are unfortunately mingled with much that we deplore, and with many actions which we bitterly repent; still in the most chequered life I firmly think there are so many little rays of sunshine to look back upon, that I do not believe any mortal (unless he had put himself without the pale of hope) would deliberately drain a goblet of the waters of Lethe, if he had it in his power.', 'Possibly you are correct in that belief, I am inclined to think you are.', 'Why, then, the good in this state of existence preponderates over the bad, let miscalled philosophers tell us what they will. If our affections be tried, our affections are our consolation and comfort; and memory, however sad, is the best and purest link between this world and a better. But come! I', 'The Baron Von Koeldwethout, of Grogzwig in Germany, was as likely a young baron as you would wish to see. I needn s of course; neither need I say that he lived in an old castle; for what German baron ever lived in a new one? There were many strange circumstances connected with this venerable building, among which, not the least startling and mysterious were, that when the wind blew, it rumbled in the chimneys, or even howled among the trees in the neighbouring forest; and that when the moon shone, she found her way through certain small loopholes in the wall, and actually made some parts of the wide halls and galleries quite light, while she left others in gloomy shadow. I believe that one of the baron', 'Talking of the baron', 'This was a merry life for the Baron of Grogzwig, and a merrier still for the baron', 'One night, after a day', 'What a pleasant thing filial piety is to contemplate! If the daughter of the Baron Von Swillenhausen had pleaded a preoccupied heart, or fallen at her father', 'There was great feasting at the castle, that day. The four-and-twenty Lincoln greens of Von Koeldwethout exchanged vows of eternal friendship with twelve Lincoln greens of Von Swillenhausen, and promised the old baron that they would drink his wine "Till all was blue"--meaning probably until their whole countenances had acquired the same tint as their noses. Everybody slapped everybody else', 'For six mortal weeks, the bears and boars had a holiday. The houses of Koeldwethout and Swillenhausen were united; the spears rusted; and the baron', '"Which, ma', '"My hunting train, ma', '"To please the devil, ma', 'Whereupon the baroness uttered a great cry, and swooned away at the baron', 'What could the baron do? He called for the lady', 'It is not for me to say by what means, or by what degrees, some wives manage to keep down some husbands as they do, although I may have my private opinion on the subject, and may think that no Member of Parliament ought to be married, inasmuch as three married members out of every four, must vote according to their wives', 'Nor was this the whole extent of the baron s recovery, still she made it a point of duty to be as nervous as possible at the castle of Grogzwig, and to divide her time between moral observations on the baron', '"I don', '"Hem!" said the baron, stopping short. "Perhaps it', 'One of the domestics, in a very kind manner, executed the baron', '"I', '"I don', '"There', '"You don', '"Why, yes, I am," answered the figure; "they', '"Just that," replied the figure, playing with his stake, and examining the ferule. "Be as quick as you can, will you, for there', '"Going to kill himself because he has too much money!" exclaimed the baron, quite tickled. "Ha! ha! that', '"I say," expostulated the figure, looking very much scared; "don', '"It', '"Pooh!" said the apparition, petulantly, "no better than a man', 'Whether the genius unintentionally committed himself in saying this, or whether he thought the baron', '"Can', '"I don s a dreary one certainly, but I don', '"Keep off!" said the baron.  ll brood over miseries no longer, but put a good face on the matter, and try the fresh air and the bears again; and if that don ll talk to the baroness soundly, and cut the Von Swillenhausens dead.', 'Von Koeldwethout never saw it again. Having once made up his mind to action, he soon brought the baroness and the Von Swillenhausens to reason, and died many years afterwards: not a rich man that I am aware of, but certainly a happy one: leaving behind him a numerous family, who had been carefully educated in bear and boar-hunting under his own personal eye. And my advice to all men is, that if ever they become hipped and melancholy from similar causes (as very many men do), they look at both sides of the question, applying a magnifying-glass to the best one; and if they still feel tempted to retire without leave, that they smoke a large pipe and drink a full bottle first, and profit by the laudable example of the Baron of Grogzwig.', 'The fresh coach is ready, ladies and gentlemen, if you please,', 'Put the boys and the boxes into the cart, and this young man and me will go on in the chaise. Get in, Nickleby.', 'Are you cold, Nickleby?', 'Rather, sir, I must say.', 'Well, I don  said Squeers;  s a long journey this weather.', 'Is it much farther to Dotheboys Hall, sir?', 'About three mile from here, But you needn', 'The fact is, it ain', 'Oh, indeed!', 'No, We call it a Hall up in London, because it sounds better, but they don s no act of Parliament against that, I believe?', 'I believe not, sir,', 'Jump out, Hallo there! Come and put this horse up. Be quick, will you!', 'Is that you, Smike?', 'Yes, sir,', 'Then why the devil didn', 'Please, sir, I fell asleep over the fire,', 'Fire! what fire? Where', 'Only in the kitchen, sir, Missus said as I was sitting up, I might go in there for a warm.', 'Your missus is a fool, You ll engage.', 'Now then! Where are you, Nickleby?', 'Here, sir,', 'Come in, then, the wind blows in, at this door, fit to knock a man off his legs.', 'How is my Squeery?', 'Quite well, my love, How', 'All right, every one of', 'And the pigs?', 'As well as they were when you went away.', 'Come; that  said Squeers, pulling off his great-coat. ', 'The boys are all as they were, I suppose?', 'Oh, yes, they  replied Mrs. Squeers, snappishly.  s had a fever.', 'No! Damn that boy, he', 'Never was such a boy, I do believe, whatever he has is always catching too. I say it t. I', 'So you did, my love, We', 'This is the new young man, my dear,', 'Oh,', 'He  said Squeers,  t you?', 'We must manage it somehow, You don', 'That  said Mrs. Squeers. And as the lady', 'What are you bothering about there, Smike? let the things alone, can', 'Eh! Oh! it', 'Yes, sir, Is there--', 'Well!', 'Have you--did anybody--has nothing been heard--about me?', 'Devil a bit,', 'Not a word, and never will be. Now, this is a pretty sort of thing, isn s a pretty sort of thing that I should have to feed a great fellow like you, and never hope to get one penny for it, isn', 'I  remarked his wife as the door closed,  s turning silly.', 'I hope not, for he d have wit enough for us though, if he was. But come; let', 'How', 'Tender as a lamb, Have a bit.', 'I couldn  replied his wife.  ll the young man take, my dear?', 'Whatever he likes that', 'What do you say, Mr. Knuckleboy?', 'I  replied Nicholas.  m not hungry.', 'Whatever you please, it', 'Ale, Squeery?', 'Certainly, A glassful.', 'Uncommon juicy steak that,', 'It  rejoined his lady. ', 'For what! Not for the--', 'No, no; not for them, on purpose for you against you came home. Lor! you didn', 'Upon my word, my dear, I didn', 'You needn  remarked his wife, laughing heartily. ', 'We  said Squeers.  s bed, my dear?', 'In Brooks  said Mrs. Squeers, pondering.  s Jennings, little Bolder, Graymarsh, and what', 'So there is, Yes! Brooks is full.', 'Full! I should think he was.', 'There  said Squeers;  t at this moment call to mind where it is. However, we clock in the morning, mind.', 'I shall be ready, sir, Good-night.', 'I  said Squeers.  ll always find a little bit of soap in the kitchen window; that belongs to you.', 'You', 'I don  he said,  ll make shift with something tomorrow morning, Mrs. Squeers will arrange that, in the course of the day. My dear, don', 'I  replied Mrs. Squeers; ', 'Dear me! what an extraordinary hand!', 'Past seven, Nickleby,', 'Has morning come already?', 'Ah! that has it, and ready iced too. Now, Nickleby, come; tumble up, will you?', 'Here  said that gentleman;  s froze.', 'Indeed!', 'Yes, You can', 'Not wash myself!', 'No, not a bit of it, So you must be content with giving yourself a dry polish till we break the ice in the well, and can get a bucketful out for the boys. Don', 'Come in, my love,', 'Drat the things, I can', 'Never mind it, my dear, it', 'No consequence, why how you talk! isn', 'I forgot, my dear, yes, it certainly is. We purify the boys', 'Purify fiddlesticks  said his lady.  t think, young man, that we go to the expense of flower of brimstone and molasses, just to purify them; because if you think we carry on the business in that way, you', 'My dear, Hem!', 'Oh! nonsense, If the young man comes to be a teacher here, let him understand, at once, that we don t something or other in the way of medicine they s fair enough I', 'A most invaluable woman, that, Nickleby,', 'Indeed, sir!', 'I don  said Squeers; ', 'It  continued Squeers,  t believe half the mothers going, would do for their own sons.', 'I should think they would not, sir,', 'But come, let', 'There, this is our shop, Nickleby!', 'Now, is that physicking over?', 'Just over, Here, you Smike; take away now. Look sharp!', 'Here, you Smike; take away now. Look sharp!', 'This is the first class in English spelling and philosophy, Nickleby, We s the first boy?', 'Please, sir, he', 'So he is, to be sure, We go upon the practical mode of teaching, Nickleby; the regular education system. C-l-e-a-n, clean, verb active, to make bright, to scour. W-i-n, win, d-e-r, der, winder, a casement. When the boy knows this out of book, he goes and does it. It s the second boy?', 'Please, sir, he', 'To be sure, So he is. B-o-t, bot, t-i-n, tin, bottin, n-e-y, ney, bottinney, noun substantive, a knowledge of plants. When he has learned that bottinney means a knowledge of plants, he goes and knows  s our system, Nickleby: what do you think of it?', 'It', 'I believe you, Third boy, what', 'A beast, sir,', 'So it is, Ain', 'I believe there is no doubt of that, sir,', 'Of course there isn  said Squeers.  s Latin for beast, as everybody that s the use of having grammars at all?', 'Where, indeed!', 'As you  resumed Squeers, turning to the boy,  ll rub you down. The rest of the class go and draw water up, till somebody tells you to leave off, for it', 'That', 'And a very good way it is, too, Now, just take them fourteen little boys and hear them some reading, because, you know, you must begin to be useful. Idling about here won', 'Let any boy speak a word without leave, and I', 'Boys, I', 'I have seen the parents of some boys, and they s no prospect at all of their going away, which of course is a very pleasant thing to reflect upon, for all parties.', 'I have had disappointments to contend against, Bolder', 'Here he is, please sir,', 'Come here, Bolder,', 'Bolder, Bolder, if you father thinks that because--why, what', 'What do you call this, sir?', 'I can  rejoined the boy, crying.  s the dirty work I think, sir--at least I don s not my fault.', 'Bolder, you', 'There, rub away as hard as you like, you won t hold that noise, won', 'Now let us see, A letter for Cobbey. Stand up, Cobbey.', 'Oh! Cobbey', 'Graymarsh, he', 'Graymarsh  said Squeers, when he had possessed himself of the contents,  s so well and happy, and sends her respectful compliments to Mrs. Squeers, and thinks she must be an angel. She likewise thinks Mr. Squeers is too good for this world; but hopes he may long be spared to carry on the business. Would have sent the two pair of stockings as desired, but is short of money, so forwards a tract instead, and hopes Graymarsh will put his trust in Providence. Hopes, above all, that he will study in everything to please Mr. and Mrs Squeers, and look upon them as his only friends; and that he will love Master Squeers; and not object to sleeping five in a bed, which no Christian should. Ah! a delightful letter. Very affecting indeed.', 'Mobbs  said Squeers,  t eat fat, and has been very ill ever since. She wishes to know, by an early post, where he expects to go to, if he quarrels with his vittles; and with what feelings he could turn up his nose at the cow t think. She is sorry to find he is discontented, which is sinful and horrid, and hopes Mr. Squeers will flog him into a happier state of mind; with which view, she has also stopped his halfpenny a week pocket-money, and given a double-bladed knife with a corkscrew in it to the Missionaries, which she had bought on purpose for him.', 'A sulky state of feeling, won', 'You need not fear me, Are you cold?', 'N-n-o.', 'You are shivering.', 'I am not cold, I am used to it.', 'Oh dear, oh dear! My heart will break. It will, it will.', 'Hush! Be a man; you are nearly one by years, God help you.', 'By years! Oh dear, dear, how many of them! How many of them since I was a little child, younger than any that are here now! Where are they all!', 'Whom do you speak of? Tell me.', 'My friends, myself--my--oh! what sufferings mine have been!', 'There is always hope,', 'No, no; none for me. Do you remember the boy that died here?', 'I was not here, you know, but what of him?', 'Why, s side, ', 'Yes, yes,', 'What faces will smile on me when I die! Who will talk to me in those long nights! They cannot come from home; they would frighten me, if they did, for I don t know them. Pain and fear, pain and fear for me, alive or dead. No hope, no hope!', 'Well, my dear, what do you think of him by this time?', 'Think of who?', 'Of the young man--the new teacher--who else could I mean?', 'Oh! that Knuckleboy, I hate him.', 'What do you hate him for, my dear?', 'What  retorted Mrs. Squeers.  s enough, ain', 'Quite enough for him, my dear, and a great deal too much I dare say, if he knew it, I only ask from curiosity, my dear.', 'Well, then, if you want to know, I s a proud, haughty, consequential, turned-up-nosed peacock.', 'Hem! He is cheap, my dear; the young man is very cheap.', 'Not a bit of it,', 'Five pound a year,', 'What of that; it t want him, isn', 'But we DO want him,', 'I don  said Mrs. Squeers.  t tell me. You can put on the cards and in the advertisements, "Education by Mr. Wackford Squeers and able assistants," without having any assistants, can t it done every day by all the masters about? I', 'Haven  said Squeers, sternly.  ll tell you what, Mrs Squeers. In this matter of having a teacher, I t run away, or get up a rebellion; and I', 'Am I to take care of the school when I grow up a man, father?', 'You are, my son,', 'Oh my eye, won  exclaimed the interesting child, grasping his father Oh, father, won em squeak again!', 'He s what I consider him,', 'Supposing he is, he is as well stuck up in our schoolroom as anywhere else, isn t like it.', 'Well, there ll bring his pride down, and it shall be no fault of mine if it don', 'Nickleby, your mother always calls things and people by their wrong names.', 'No matter for that, I see them with right eyes, and that t.', 'Never mind that, father, Who is the man?', 'Why, your father has got some nonsense in his head that he', 'The son of a gentleman!', 'Yes; but I don s a gentleman s a fondling, that', 'Mrs. Squeers intended to say ', 'He  said Squeers, in answer to the above remark, ', 'for his father was married to his mother years before he was born, and she is alive now. If he was, it would be no business of ours, for we make a very good friend by having him here; and if he likes to learn the boys anything besides minding them, I have no objection I am sure.', 'I say again, I hate him worse than poison,', 'If you dislike him, my dear, I don s no occasion, with him, to take the trouble to hide it.', 'I don', 'That  said Squeers;  t believe there s spirit down, as quick as you can, my love.', 'something quite out of the common.', 'I beg your pardon, I thought my father was--or might be--dear me, how very awkward!', 'Mr. Squeers is out,', 'Do you know will he be long, sir?', 'He said about an hour,', 'I never knew anything happen so cross, Thank you! I am very sorry I intruded, I am sure. If I hadn t upon any account have--it is very provoking--must look so very strange,', 'Thank you! I am very sorry I intruded, I am sure. If I hadn t upon any account have--it is very provoking--must look so very strange,', 'If that is all you want, s daughter, ', 'Shall it be a hard or a soft nib?', 'He HAS a beautiful smile,', 'Which did you say?', 'Dear me, I was thinking of something else for the moment, I declare, Oh! as soft as possible, if you please.', 'Very awkward of me,', 'Not at all, sir, it was my fault. It was all my foolish--a--a--good-morning!', 'Goodbye, The next I make for you, I hope will be made less clumsily. Take care! You are biting the nib off now.', 'Really, so embarrassing that I scarcely know what I--very sorry to give you so much trouble.', 'Not the least trouble in the world,', 'I never saw such legs in the whole course of my life!', 'Isn', 'Most extraordinary, But what has he said to you?', 'Don  rejoined Miss Squeers. ', 'Did he look in this way?', 'Very like that--only more genteel,', 'Ah! then he means something, depend on it.', 'How I should like to see him!', 'So you shall,   replied Miss Squeers.  s going away for two days to fetch some boys; and when she does, I', 'did', 'Where Tilda?', 'Only gone home to clean himself, He will be here by the time the tea', 'I do so palpitate,', 'Ah! I know what it is,', 'I have not been used to it, you know, ', 'You', 'There he is! Oh ', 'Hush! Tilda. ', 'Come in,', 'Good-evening, I understood from Mr. Squeers that--', 'Oh yes; it  interposed Miss Squeers.  t tea with us, but you won', 'We are only waiting for one more gentleman,', 'But if it  said the young lady,  t mind me a bit, for I', "'Tilda, I am ashamed of you;", 'I am ashamed of you;', 'Well, as I am here, and seem expected, for some reason or other, to be amiable, it', 'Well, John,', 'Weel,', 'I beg your pardon, Mr. Nickleby--Mr. John Browdie.', 'Servant, sir,', 'Yours to command, sir,', 'Old wooman awa t she?', 'Ye wean ry neight, I expect, mun,', 'Ecod, they dean em. Ye', 'You are facetious, sir,', 'Na; I dean  replied Mr. Browdie,  oother teacher,  un, he wur.', 'I don  said Nicholas in a towering passion, ', 'If you say another word, John, s mouth as he was about to interrupt,  ll never forgive you, or speak to you again.', 'Weel, my lass, I dean un, let  un gang on.', 'What', 'Nothing, ', 'There never was any danger, was there, Mr. Nickleby?', 'None at all, Absurd.', 'That  whispered Miss Price,  ll soon come round. Here! Shall John and I go into the little kitchen, and come back presently?', 'Not on any account, What on earth should you do that for?', 'Well, you ARE a one to keep company.', 'What do you mean? I am not a one to keep company at all--here at all events. I can', 'No, nor I neither, but men are always fickle, and always were, and always will be; that I can make out, very easily.', 'Fickle! what do you suppose? You don', 'Oh no, I think nothing at all, Look at her, dressed so beautiful and looking so well--really ALMOST handsome. I am ashamed at you.', 'Look at her, dressed so beautiful and looking so well--really ALMOST handsome. I am ashamed at you.', 'My dear girl, what have I got to do with her dressing beautifully or looking well?', 'Come, don  said Miss Price--smiling a little though, for she was pretty, and a coquette too in her small way, and Nicholas was good-looking, and she supposed him the property of somebody else, which were all reasons why she should be gratified to think she had made an impression on him,-- s my fault. Come; we', 'There are only four of us,   said Miss Squeers, looking slyly at Nicholas; ', 'What do you say, Mr. Nickleby?', 'With all the pleasure in life,', 'Mr. Browdie, shall we make a bank against them?', 'We intend to win everything,', "'Tilda HAS won something she didn t you, dear?", 'Only a dozen and eight, love,', 'How dull you are tonight!', 'No, indeed, I am in excellent spirits. I was thinking YOU seemed out of sorts.', 'Me! Oh no!', 'That  remarked Miss Price.  s coming out of curl, dear.', 'Never mind me, you had better attend to your partner.', 'Thank you for reminding her, So she had.', 'I never had such luck, really, It', 'I wish you had.', 'You', 'Not if your wish is gratified, I am sure I shall have a good one in that case.', 'We have all the talking to ourselves, it seems,', 'You do it so well, that it would be a pity to interrupt, wouldn', 'Nay, we do it in default of having anybody else to talk to.', 'We ll say anything,', 'Thank you, ', 'Or you can talk to each other, if you don  said Miss Price, rallying her dear friend.  t you say something?', 'Say summat?', 'Ay, and not sit there so silent and glum.', 'Weel, then! what I say  this ony longer. Do ye gang whoam wi  toight young whipster look sharp out for a brokken head, next time he cums under my hond.', 'Mercy on us, what', 'Cum whoam, tell   replied the Yorkshireman, sternly. And as he delivered the reply, Miss Squeers burst into a shower of tears; arising in part from desperate vexation, and in part from an impotent desire to lacerate somebody', 'Why, and here  exclaimed Miss Price, as if in fresh amazement. ', 'Oh! you don t know. Pray don', 'Well, I', 'And who cares whether you are sure or not, ma', 'You are monstrous polite, ma', 'I shall not come to you to take lessons in the art, ma', 'You needn am, however, because that', "'Tilda, I hate you.", 'Ah! There  said Miss Price, tying her bonnet strings with a jerk.  ll cry your eyes out, when I', 'I scorn your words, Minx,', 'You pay me a great compliment when you say so, s daughter, curtseying very low.  am, and pleasant dreams attend your sleep!', 'This is one consequence, of my cursed readiness to adapt myself to any society in which chance carries me. If I had sat mute and motionless, as I might have done, this would not have happened.', 'I was glad, to grasp at any relief from the sight of this dreadful place, or the presence of its vile master. I have set these people by the ears, and made two new enemies, where, Heaven knows, I needed none. Well, it is a just punishment for having forgotten, even for an hour, what is around me now!', 'I think I have caught it now, The very shade! This will be the sweetest portrait I have ever done, certainly.', 'It will be your genius that makes it so, then, I am sure,', 'No, no, I won  rejoined Miss La Creevy.  s a very nice subject--a very nice subject, indeed--though, of course, something depends upon the mode of treatment.', 'And not a little,', 'Why, my dear, you are right there, in the main you are right there; though I don', 'They must be, I have no doubt,', 'They are beyond anything you can form the faintest conception of, What with bringing out eyes with all one s force, and adding to heads, and taking away teeth altogether, you have no idea of the trouble one little miniature is.', 'The remuneration can scarcely repay you,', 'Why, it does not, and that  answered Miss La Creevy;  s no pleasure in painting them. Sometimes they say, "Oh, how very serious you have made me look, Miss La Creevy!" and at others, "La, Miss La Creevy, how very smirking!" when the very essence of a good portrait is, that it must be either serious or smirking, or it', 's no portrait at all.', 'Indeed!', 'Certainly, my dear; because the sitters are always either the one or the other, Look at the Royal Academy! All those beautiful shiny portraits of gentlemen in black velvet waistcoats, with their fists doubled up on round tables, or marble slabs, are serious, you know; and all the ladies who are playing with little parasols, or little dogs, or little children--it  said Miss La Creevy, sinking her voice to a confidential whisper,  t care so much about looking clever.', 'What a number of officers you seem to paint!', 'Number of what, child? Character portraits, oh yes--they', 'No!', 'Bless your heart, of course not; only clerks and that, who hire a uniform coat to be painted in, and send it here in a carpet bag. Some artists, keep a red coat, and charge seven-and-sixpence extra for hire and carmine; but I don t consider it legitimate.', 'And when, when do you expect to see your uncle again?', 'I scarcely know; I had expected to have seen him before now, Soon I hope, for this state of uncertainty is worse than anything.', 'I suppose he has money, hasn', 'He is very rich, I have heard, I don', 'Ah, you may depend upon it he is, or he wouldn  remarked Miss La Creevy, who was an odd little mixture of shrewdness and simplicity.  s a bear, he is generally pretty independent.', 'His manner is rough,', 'Rough! a porcupine', 'It is only his manner, I believe, he was disappointed in early life, I think I have heard, or has had his temper soured by some calamity. I should be sorry to think ill of him until I knew he deserved it.', 'Well; that  observed the miniature painter,  t he, without feeling it himself, make you and your mama some nice little allowance that would keep you both comfortable until you were well married, and be a little fortune to her afterwards? What would a hundred a year for instance, be to him?', 'and Heaven forbid that I should be the cause of your doing so! But, now, mightn', 'I don  said Kate, with energy, ', 'Heyday!', 'A dependence upon him, would embitter my whole life. I should feel begging a far less degradation.', 'Well! This of a relation whom you will not hear an indifferent person speak ill of, my dear, sounds oddly enough, I confess.', 'I dare say it does, indeed I am sure it must. I--I--only mean that with the feelings and recollection of better times upon me, I could not bear to live on anybody s.', 'I only ask of him, that he will move so little out of his way, in my behalf, as to enable me by his recommendation--only by his recommendation--to earn, literally, my bread and remain with my mother. Whether we shall ever taste happiness again, depends upon the fortunes of my dear brother; but if he will do this, and Nicholas only tells us that he is well and cheerful, I shall be contented.', 'that he will move so little out of his way, in my behalf, as to enable me by his recommendation--only by his recommendation--to earn, literally, my bread and remain with my mother. Whether we shall ever taste happiness again, depends upon the fortunes of my dear brother; but if he will do this, and Nicholas only tells us that he is well and cheerful, I shall be contented.', 'Come in, whoever it is!', 'Your servant, ladies, You were talking so loud, that I was unable to make you hear.', 'You were talking so loud, that I was unable to make you hear.', 'I called in, on my way upstairs, more than half expecting to find you here, Is that my niece am?', 'Yes it is, Mr. Nickleby, and between you and me and the post, sir, it will be a very nice portrait too, though I say it who am the painter.', 'Don am, I have no eye for likenesses. Is it nearly finished?', 'Why, yes, Two sittings more will--', 'Have them at once, ma  said Ralph.  ll have no time to idle over fooleries after tomorrow. Work, ma am?', 'I have not put a bill up yet, sir.', 'Put it up at once, ma t want the rooms after this week, or if they do, can re ready, we', 'I have found a situation for your daughter, ma', 'Well, Now, I will say that that is only just what I have expected of you. "Depend upon it," I said to Kate, only yesterday morning at breakfast, "that after your uncle has provided, in that most ready manner, for Nicholas, he will not leave us until he has done at least the same for you." These were my very words, as near as I remember. Kate, my dear, why don', 'Let me proceed, ma', 'Kate, my love, let your uncle proceed,', 'I am most anxious that he should, mama,', 'Well, my dear, if you are anxious that he should, you had better allow your uncle to say what he has to say, without interruption, Your uncle', 'I am very much obliged to you, ma  said Ralph with a scarcely perceptible sneer. ', 'I fear it is so indeed, Your poor brother--', 'My poor brother, ma  interposed Ralph tartly, ', 'I fear he was, If it hadn t know what would have become of him.', 'If it hadn t know what would have become of him.', 'Repining is of no use, ma  said Ralph. ', 'So it is, So it is.', 'As you feel so keenly, in your own purse and person, the consequences of inattention to business, ma  said Ralph, ', 'Of course I must see that, Sad experience, you know, brother-in-law.--Kate, my dear, put that down in the next letter to Nicholas, or remind me to do it if I write.', 'The situation that I have made interest to procure, ma', 'A milliner!', 'A milliner and dressmaker, ma  replied Ralph.  am, who are so well acquainted with all matters in the ordinary routine of life, make large fortunes, keep equipages, and become persons of great wealth and fortune.', 'What your uncle says is very true, Kate, my dear, I recollect when your poor papa and I came to town after we were married, that a young lady brought me home a chip cottage-bonnet, with white and green trimming, and green persian lining, in her own carriage, which drove up to the door full gallop;--at least, I am not quite certain whether it was her own carriage or a hackney chariot, but I remember very well that the horse dropped down dead as he was turning round, and that your poor papa said he hadn', 'I recollect when your poor papa and I came to town after we were married, that a young lady brought me home a chip cottage-bonnet, with white and green trimming, and green persian lining, in her own carriage, which drove up to the door full gallop;--at least, I am not quite certain whether it was her own carriage or a hackney chariot, but I remember very well that the horse dropped down dead as he was turning round, and that your poor papa said he hadn', 'The lady  said Ralph, hastily striking in,  ll take her there directly.', 'Have you nothing to say to your uncle, my love?', 'A great deal, but not now. I would rather speak to him when we are alone;--it will save his time if I thank him and say what I wish to say to him, as we walk along.', 'Now, walk as fast as you can, and you ll have to walk to business with, every morning.', 'I am very much obliged to you, uncle, very.', 'I  said Ralph.  ll do your duty.', 'I will try to please, uncle, indeed I--', 'Don  growled Ralph; ', 'It', 'It is, and very affected besides. Let me see no more of it.', 'Uncle, I must ask one question of you. I am to live at home?', 'I must ask one question of you. I am to live at home?', 'At home! where', 'I mean with my mother--THE WIDOW,', 'You will live, to all intents and purposes, here, for here you will take your meals, and here you will be from morning till night--occasionally perhaps till morning again.', 'But at night, I mean, I cannot leave her, uncle. I must have some place that I can call a home; it will be wherever she is, you know, and may be a very humble one.', 'May be! must be, you mean. May be a humble one! Is the girl mad?', 'The word slipped from my lips, I did not mean it indeed,', 'I hope not,', 'But my question, uncle; you have not answered it.', 'Why, I anticipated something of the kind, and--though I object very strongly, mind--have provided against it. I spoke of you as an out-of-door worker; so you will go to this home that may be humble, every night.', 'Here. Hollo! Who', 'Demmit, you don', 'Not yet,', 'Ha! ha! demmit,', 'My niece,', 'I remember, Demmit, I remember what you come for. Step this way, Nickleby; my dear, will you follow me? Ha! ha! They all follow me, Nickleby; always did, demmit, always.', 'Sit down, my dear, This cursed high room takes one m afraid I must move, Nickleby.', 'This cursed high room takes one m afraid I must move, Nickleby.', 'I would, by all means,', 'What a demd rum fellow you are, Nickleby, the demdest, longest-headed, queerest-tempered old coiner of gold and silver ever was--demmit.', 'My life, what a demd devil of a time you have been!', 'I didn', 'Then what a doubly demd infernal rascal that footman must be, my soul,', 'My dear, that is entirely your fault.', 'My fault, my heart', 'Certainly, what can you expect, dearest, if you will not correct the man?', 'Correct the man, my soul', 'Yes; I am sure he wants speaking to, badly enough,', 'Then do not vex itself, he shall be horse-whipped till he cries out demnebly.', 'Now, ma  said Ralph, who had looked on, at all this, with such scorn as few men can express in looks, ', 'Just so, Mr. Nickleby, Can you speak French, child?', 'Yes, ma', 'Like a demd native?', 'We keep twenty young women constantly employed in the establishment,', 'Indeed, ma', 'Yes; and some of ', 'Mantalini!', 'My senses', 'Do you wish to break my heart?', 'Not for twenty thousand hemispheres populated with--with--with little ballet-dancers,', 'Then you will, if you persevere in that mode of speaking, What can Mr. Nickleby think when he hears you?', 'Oh! Nothing, ma  replied Ralph.   quarrels that add sweetness to those domestic joys which promise to last so long--that s all.', 'You will pay no attention, if you please, to what Mr. Mantalini says,', 'I do not, ma', 'Mr. Mantalini knows nothing whatever about any of the young women, If he has seen any of them, he must have seen them in the street, going to, or returning from, their work, and not here. He was never even in the room. I do not allow it. What hours of work have you been accustomed to?', 'I have never yet been accustomed to work at all, ma', 'For which reason she', 'I hope so, our hours are from nine to nine, with extra work when we', 'Your meals, that is, dinner and tea, you will take here. I should think your wages would average from five to seven shillings a week; but I can', 'If you  said Madame Mantalini, ', 'Nothing more, ma', 'Then I believe that', 'There! now you', 'I had some idea, of providing for your mother in a pleasant part of the country--(he had a presentation to some almshouses on the borders of Cornwall, which had occurred to him more than once)--but as you want to be together, I must do something else for her. She has a little money?', 'A very little,', 'A little will go a long way if it  said Ralph. ', 'You told us to do so, uncle.', 'Yes; there is a house empty that belongs to me, which I can put you into till it is let, and then, if nothing else turns up, perhaps I shall have another. You must live there.', 'Is it far from here, sir?', 'Pretty well, in another quarter of the town--at the East end; but I clock on Saturday, to take you there. Goodbye. You know your way? Straight on.', 'I am afraid it is an unhealthy occupation, I recollect getting three young milliners to sit to me, when I first began to paint, and I remember that they were all very pale and sickly.', 'Oh! that  observed Mrs. Nickleby; ', 'for I remember, as well as if it was only yesterday, employing one that I was particularly recommended to, to make me a scarlet cloak at the time when scarlet cloaks were fashionable, and she had a very red face--a very red face, indeed.', 'Perhaps she drank,', 'I don  returned Mrs. Nickleby: ', 'I shall be sorry--truly sorry to leave you, my kind friend,', 'You shall not shake me off, for all that, I shall see you very often, and come and hear how you get on; and if, in all London, or all the wide world besides, there is no other heart that takes an interest in your welfare, there will be one little lonely woman that prays for it night and day.', 'From Mr. Ralph Nickleby,', 'We shall be ready directly, We have not much to carry, but I fear we must have a coach.', 'I', 'Indeed you shall not trouble yourself,', 'I will,', 'I can', 'You can', 'Not help it!', 'No; I thought of it as I came along; but didn t be ready. I think of a great many things. Nobody can prevent that.', 'Oh yes, I understand you, Mr. Noggs, Our thoughts are free, of course. Everybody', 'They wouldn', 'Well, no more they would, Mr. Noggs, and that  rejoined Mrs Nickleby.  s your master?', 'I am sure we are very much obliged to him,', 'Very, I', 'Excuse my curiosity, but did I not see you in the coachyard, on the morning my brother went away to Yorkshire?', 'No! I should have said so anywhere.', 'You  rejoined Newman.  s the first time I ve had the gout.', 'This house depresses and chills one, and seems as if some blight had fallen on it. If I were superstitious, I should be almost inclined to believe that some dreadful crime had been perpetrated within these old walls, and that the place had never prospered since. How frowning and how dark it looks!', 'Lord, my dear, don ll frighten me to death.', 'It is only my foolish fancy, mama,', 'Well, then, my love, I wish you would keep your foolish fancy to yourself, and not wake up MY foolish fancy to keep it company, Why didn  This was Mrs. Nickleby', 'Well, my dear, now isn t been for his thoughtfulness!', 'Very kind, indeed,', 'We need detain you no longer, I think,', 'Is there nothing I can do?', 'Nothing, thank you,', 'Perhaps, my dear, Mr. Noggs would like to drink our healths,', 'I think, mama, s averted face, ', 'How lovely your hair do curl tonight, miss! I declare if it isn', 'Hold your tongue!', 'Well, I couldn  said the attendant, ', 'I know it  continued the girl, delighted to see the impression she was making,  n, and all; but she do dress herself out so, and go on in such a manner to get noticed, that--oh--well, if people only saw themselves!', 'What do you mean, Phib? How you talk!', 'Talk, miss! It', 'She DOES toss her head,', 'So vain, and so very--very plain,', 'Poor ', 'And always laying herself out so, to get to be admired, Oh, dear! It', 'I can  said Miss Squeers.  Tilda t know any better, it', "'Tilda t know any better, it", 'Well, but you know, miss, Phib if she was only to take copy by a friend--oh! if she only knew how wrong she was, and would but set herself right by you, what a nice young woman she might be in time!', 'Phib, it Tilda look a coarse improper sort of person, and it seems unfriendly in me to listen to them. I would rather you dropped the subject, Phib; at the same time, I must say, that if ', 'Oh yes; you, miss,', 'Well, me, Phib, if you will have it so, I must say, that if she would, she would be all the better for it.', 'So somebody else thinks, or I am much mistaken,', 'What do you mean?', 'Never mind, miss, I know what I know; that', 'Phib, I insist upon your explaining yourself. What is this dark mystery? Speak.', 'Why, if you will have it, miss, it  said the servant girl.  t too far gone to do it creditable, he', 'Gracious heavens! What is this?', 'Truth, ma', 'What a situation! on the brink of unconsciously destroying the peace and happiness of my own ', 'Because they can  replied the girl;  s plain.', 'Never let me hear of it again, Never! Do you hear?  Tilda, and only hope she may make a better wife than I think she will.', 'Well, Fanny, s daughter, ', 'I pity your bad passions,   replied Miss Squeers, ', 'Don  said Miss Price. ', 'What may that be, ', 'This, After we left here last night John and I had a dreadful quarrel.', 'That doesn', 'Lor! I wouldn  rejoined her companion.  s not it.', 'Oh! Go on.', 'After a great deal of wrangling, and saying we would never see each other any more, we made it up, and this morning John went and wrote our names down to be put up, for the first time, next Sunday, so we shall be married in three weeks, and I give you notice to get your frock made.', 'But come now, Fanny, I want to have a word or two with you about young Mr. Nickleby.', 'He is nothing to me, I despise him too much!', 'Oh, you don  replied her friend.  t you like him now?', 'I hate everybody, and I wish that everybody was dead--that I do.', 'Dear, dear, You are not serious, I am sure.', 'Yes, I am, And I wish I was dead too. There!', 'Oh! you  said Matilda.  t it be much nicer, now, to have him all to yourself on good terms, in a company-keeping, love-making, pleasant sort of manner?', 'I don  sobbed Miss Squeers.  Tilda, how could you have acted so mean and dishonourable! I wouldn', 'Heyday! One would suppose I had been murdering somebody at least.', 'Very nigh as bad,', 'And all this because I happen to have enough of good looks to make people civil to me, Persons don s no more my fault if mine is a good one than it is other people', 'Hold your tongue, or you Tilda, and afterwards I should be sorry for it!', 'Shall we turn back, or run into a cottage? He don', 'No,   replied Miss Squeers, ', 'Good-morning,', 'He is going, I shall choke, ', 'Come back, Mr. Nickleby, do! s threat, but really actuated by a malicious wish to hear what Nicholas would say; ', 'Don  urged Miss Price, hastily; ', 'Better, s shoulder. ', 'Don  said Miss Price: her bright eye dancing with merriment as she saw the perplexity of Nicholas;  s those who are too proud to come round again, without all this to-do, that ought to be ashamed.', 'You are resolved to fix it upon me, I see, although I told you, last night, it was not my fault.', 'although I told you, last night, it was not my fault.', 'There; he says it was not his fault, my dear, Perhaps you were too jealous, or too hasty with him? He says it was not his fault. You hear; I think that', 'You will not understand me, Pray dispense with this jesting, for I have no time, and really no inclination, to be the subject or promoter of mirth just now.', 'What do you mean?', 'Don Tilda, I forgive him.', 'Dear me, this is more serious than I supposed. Allow me! Will you have the goodness to hear me speak?', 'I am very sorry--truly and sincerely sorry--for having been the cause of any difference among you, last night. I reproach myself, most bitterly, for having been so unfortunate as to cause the dissension that occurred, although I did so, I assure you, most unwittingly and heedlessly.', 'Well; that', 'I fear there is something more, it is a most awkward thing to say--but--the very mention of such a supposition makes one look like a puppy--still--may I ask if that lady supposes that I entertain any--in short, does she think that I am in love with her?', 'Delightful embarrassment, I have brought him to it, at last. Answer for me, dear,', 'Does she think so? of course she does.', 'She does!', 'Certainly,', 'If Mr. Nickleby has doubted that,   said the blushing Miss Squeers in soft accents, ', 'Stop, pray hear me. This is the grossest and wildest delusion, the completest and most signal mistake, that ever human being laboured under, or committed. I have scarcely seen the young lady half-a-dozen times, but if I had seen her sixty times, or am destined to see her sixty thousand, it would be, and will be, precisely the same. I have not one thought, wish, or hope, connected with her, unless it be--and I say this, not to hurt her feelings, but to impress her with the real state of my own--unless it be the one object, dear to my heart as life itself, of being one day able to turn my back upon this accursed place, never to set foot in it again, or think of it--even think of it--but with loathing and disgust.', 'Let him see, if I don', 'I can  said the dejected creature, looking up with bitter disappointment in every feature. ', 'Do not try,', 'Do not for God  said Nicholas, in an agitated voice; ', 'They are more hard with me than ever,', 'I know it, They are.', 'But for you, I should die. They would kill me; they would; I know they would.', 'You will do better, poor fellow, when I am gone.', 'Gone!', 'Softly! Yes.', 'Are you going?', 'I cannot say, I was speaking more to my own thoughts, than to you.', 'Tell me, oh do tell me, WILL you go--WILL you?', 'I shall be driven to that at last! The world is before me, after all.', 'Tell me, is the world as bad and dismal as this place?', 'Heaven forbid, its hardest, coarsest toil, were happiness to this.', 'Should I ever meet you there?', 'Yes,', 'No, no! Should I--should I--tell me that again. Say I should be sure to find you.', 'You would, and I would help and aid you, and not bring fresh sorrow on you as I have done here.', 'Now then, are you going to sleep all day, up there--', 'You lazy hounds?', 'We shall be down directly, sir,', 'Down directly! Ah! you had better be down directly, or I s that Smike?', 'Smike!', 'Do you want your head broke in a fresh place, Smike?', 'Confound his impudence! Nickleby!', 'Well, sir.', 'Send that obstinate scoundrel down; don', 'He is not here, sir,', 'Don  retorted the schoolmaster. ', 'He is not, don', 'We shall soon see that, I', 'What does this mean? Where have you hid him?', 'I have seen nothing of him since last night,', 'Come, you won', 'At the bottom of the nearest pond for aught I know,', 'Damn you, what do you mean by that?', 'Please, sir, I think Smike', 'Ha! Who said that?', 'Tomkins, please sir,', 'You think he has run away, do you, sir?', 'Yes, please sir,', 'And what, sir, what reason have you to suppose that any boy would want to run away from this establishment? Eh, sir?', 'There, Now if any other boy thinks Smike has run away, I shall be glad to have a talk with him.', 'Well, Nickleby, YOU think he has run away, I suppose?', 'I think it extremely likely,', 'Oh, you do, do you? Maybe you know he has?', 'I know nothing of the kind.', 'He didn', 'He did not, I am very glad he did not, for it would then have been my duty to have warned you in time.', 'Which no doubt you would have been devilish sorry to do,', 'I should indeed, You interpret my feelings with great accuracy.', 'What  said the lady, as the boys fell off right and left, to save her the trouble of clearing a passage with her brawny arms. ', 'Why, my dear, the fact is, that Smike is not to be found.', 'Well, I know that, and where t you stir out of there till you have leave given you, or you and I may fall out in a way that', 'Indeed!', 'Yes; and indeed and indeed again, Mister Jackanapes, and I wouldn', 'Nor would you if I had mine, Now, boys!', 'Ah! Now, boys, Follow your leader, boys, and take pattern by Smike if you dare. See what he', 'If I catch him, I', 'IF you catch him, you are sure to; you can', 'He is off, The cow-house and stable are locked up, so he can s not downstairs anywhere, for the girl has looked. He must have gone York way, and by a public road too.', 'Why must he?', 'Stupid! He hadn', 'Never had a penny of his own in his whole life, that I know of,', 'To be sure, and he didn ll answer for. Ha! ha! ha!', 'Ha! ha! ha!', 'Then, of course, he must beg his way, and he could do that, nowhere, but on the public road.', 'That', 'True! Yes; but you would never have thought of it, for all that, if I hadn  replied his wife.  s chaise, and go the other, what with keeping our eyes open, and asking questions, one or other of us is pretty certain to lay hold of him.', 'No news of the scamp! I t hunt him down; so I give you warning.', 'It is not in my power to console you, sir, It is nothing to me.', 'Isn  said Squeers in a threatening manner. ', 'We shall,', 'Here ll cost fifteen shillings besides other expenses, who', 'I  said Squeers, his usual harsh crafty manner changed to open bullying  s past your bedtime! Come! Get out!', 'Lift him out, Bring him in; bring him in!', 'Take care, We tied his legs under the apron and made', 'We tied his legs under the apron and made', 'Is every boy here?', 'Each boy keep his place, Nickleby! to your desk, sir.', 'Nothing, I suppose?', 'Have you anything to say? Stand a little out of the way, Mrs. Squeers, my dear; I', 'Spare me, sir!', 'Oh! that  said Squeers.  ll flog you within an inch of your life, and spare you that.', 'Ha, ha, ha, that un!', 'I was driven to do it,', 'Driven to do it, were you? Oh! it wasn', 'A nasty, ungrateful, pig-headed, brutish, obstinate, sneaking dog, s head under her arm, and administering a cuff at every epithet; ', 'Stand aside, my dear, We', 'Who cried stop?', 'I, This must not go on.', 'Must not go on!', 'No!', 'I say must not, shall not. I will prevent it.', 'You have disregarded all my quiet interference in the miserable lad  said Nicholas;  t blame me for this public interference. You have brought it upon yourself; not I.', 'Sit down, beggar!', 'Wretch, touch him at your peril! I will not stand by, and see it done. My blood is up, and I have the strength of ten such men as you. Look to yourself, for by Heaven I will not spare you, if you drive me on!', 'Stand back,', 'I have a long series of insults to avenge, and my indignation is aggravated by the dastardly cruelties practised on helpless infancy in this foul den. Have a care; for if you do raise the devil within me, the consequences shall fall heavily upon your own head!', 'I am in no mood for more noise and riot, and yet, do what I will, I shall have an altercation with this honest blockhead, and perhaps a blow or two from yonder staff.', 'Servant, young genelman,', 'Yours,', 'Weel; we ha', 'Yes, Come! s pause, ', 'Shake honds! ah! that I weel; s fist a huge wrench:  at be the matther wi', 'It is a cut, a blow; but I returned it to the giver, and with good interest too.', 'Noa, did   exclaimed John Browdie.  un for thot.', 'The fact is, the fact is, that I have been ill-treated.', 'Noa! dean', 'Yes, I have, by that man Squeers, and I have beaten him soundly, and am leaving this place in consequence.', 'What! Beatten the schoolmeasther! Ho! ho! ho! Beatten the schoolmeasther! who ever heard o  that noo! Giv  thee for', 'No, I do not, but it is of no great consequence to me, for I intend walking.', 'Gang awa', 'Every step of the way, I should be many steps further on by this time, and so goodbye!', 'Nay noo, stan', 'Not much, but I can make it enough. Where there s a way, you know.', 'Dean  he said;   eneaf to carry thee whoam. Thee  warrant.', 'Tak  timber to help thee on wi  he added, pressing his stick on Nicholas, and giving his hand another squeeze;  Cod it ve heerd this twonty year!', 'Strange! can this be some lingering creation of the visions that have scarcely left me! It cannot be real--and yet I--I am awake! Smike!', 'Why do you kneel to me?', 'To go with you--anywhere--everywhere--to the world  replied Smike, clinging to his hand. ', 'I am a friend who can do little for you, How came you here?', 'Poor fellow! your hard fate denies you any friend but one, and he is nearly as poor and helpless as yourself.', 'May I--may I go with you? I will be your faithful hard-working servant, I will, indeed. I want no clothes, these will do very well. I only want to be near you.', 'And you shall, And the world shall deal by you as it does by me, till one or both of us shall quit it for a better. Come!', 'A nasty night, Mr. Noggs!', 'Does it rain?', 'Does it? I am wet through.', 'It doesn', 'Well; and that makes it the more vexatious,', 'You have not turned saving, at this time of day, I hope?', 'To the Kenwigses?', 'Think of that now! If I didn t--tell Kenwigs I couldn', 'I was obliged to go, They would have me.', 'Well; but what  urged the selfish man, who never thought of anybody else.  s all your fault. I ll sit by your fire till you come back again.', 'the Kenwigses,', 'went on s eyes. There was only one drawback upon the pleasure of seeing such friends, and that was, that the lady in the back-parlour, who was very fat, and turned of sixty, came in a low book-muslin dress and short kid gloves, which so exasperated Mrs Kenwigs, that that lady assured her visitors, in private, that if it hadn', 'My dear, wouldn', 'Kenwigs, my dear, I am surprised at you. Would you begin without my uncle?', 'I forgot the collector, oh no, that would never do.', 'He  said Mrs. Kenwigs, turning to the other married lady, ', 'Dear!', 'You  replied Mrs. Kenwigs; ', 'The kindest-hearted man as ever was,', 'It goes to his heart, I believe, to be forced to cut the water off, when the people don', 'George, none of that, if you please.', 'It was only my joke,', 'George, a joke is a wery good thing--a wery good thing--but when that joke is made at the expense of Mrs. Kenwigs s relation is a public man, and that he knows, George, and that he can bear; but putting Mrs. Kenwigs out of the question (if I COULD put Mrs. Kenwigs out of the question on such an occasion as this), I have the honour to be connected with the collector by marriage; and I cannot allow these remarks in my-- house, apartments', 'That  whispered Mr. Kenwigs, greatly excited.  s be talking.', 'Oh, uncle, I am SO glad to see you, So glad!', 'Many happy returns of the day, my dear,', 'Where will you sit, uncle?', 'Anywheres, my dear, I am not particular.', 'Mr. Lillyvick, some friends here, sir, are very anxious for the honour of--thank you--Mr. and Mrs Cutler, Mr. Lillyvick.', 'Proud to know you, sir, I  These were not mere words of ceremony; for, Mr. Cutler, having kept house in Mr. Lillyvick', 'George, you know, I think, Mr. Lillyvick, lady from downstairs--Mr. Lillyvick. Mr. Snewkes--Mr. Lillyvick. Miss Green--Mr Lillyvick. Mr. Lillyvick--Miss Petowker of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Very glad to make two public characters acquainted! Mrs. Kenwigs, my dear, will you sort the counters?', 'They are so beautiful!', 'Oh, dear, so they are! it t give way, don', 'I can--not help it, and it don  sobbed Mrs. Kenwigs;  re too beautiful to live, much too beautiful!', 'This day eight year, Dear me--ah!', 'dear me,', 'I was younger then,', 'No,', 'Certainly not,', 'I remember my niece, I remember her, on that very afternoon, when she first acknowledged to her mother a partiality for Kenwigs. "Mother," she says, "I love him."', '"Adore him," I said, uncle,', '"Love him," I think, my dear,', 'Perhaps you are right, uncle, I thought it was "adore."', '"Love," my dear, "Mother," she says, "I love him!" "What do I hear?" cries her mother; and instantly falls into strong conwulsions.', 'Into strong conwulsions, Kenwigs will excuse my saying, in the presence of friends, that there was a very great objection to him, on the ground that he was beneath the family, and would disgrace it. You remember, Kenwigs?', 'Certainly,', 'I shared in that feeling, perhaps it was natural; perhaps it wasn', 'I came round to him in time, After they were married, and there was no help for it, I was one of the first to say that Kenwigs must be taken notice of. The family DID take notice of him, in consequence, and on my representation; and I am bound to say--and proud to say--that I have always found him a very honest, well-behaved, upright, respectable sort of man. Kenwigs, shake hands.', 'I am proud to do it, sir,', 'So am I, Kenwigs,', 'A very happy life I have led with your niece, sir,', 'It would have been your own fault if you had not, sir,', 'Morleena Kenwigs, kiss your dear uncle!', 'kiss your dear uncle!', 'Oh dear, Mrs. Kenwigs, while Mr. Noggs is making that punch to drink happy returns in, do let Morleena go through that figure dance before Mr. Lillyvick.', 'No, no, my dear, it will only worry my uncle.', 'It can  said Miss Petowker.  t you, sir?', 'That I am sure I shall', 'Well then, I  said Mrs. Kenwigs,  s Burial, afterwards.', 'You know, that I dislike doing anything professional in private parties.', 'Oh, but not here! We are all so very friendly and pleasant, that you might as well be going through it in your own room; besides, the occasion--', 'I can  interrupted Miss Petowker; ', 'If I was blessed with a--a child-- of such genius as that, I would have her out at the Opera instantly.', 'Kenwigs is afraid,', 'What of? not of her failing?', 'Oh no, but if she grew up what she is now,--only think of the young dukes and marquises.', 'Very right,', 'Still, if she took a proper pride in herself, you know--', 'There', 'I only know-- it may be no rule to be sure--but I have never found any inconvenience or unpleasantness of that sort.', 'Who is that?', 'Don s only me, The baby is very comfortable, for I peeped into the room as I came down, and it t think the candle will set fire to the bed-curtain, unless a draught was to get into the room--it s wanted.', 'Me!', 'Why, it IS a queer hour, isn  replied Crowl, who was not best pleased at the prospect of losing his fire; ', 'No, People? How many?', 'Two,', 'Want me? By name?', 'By name, Mr. Newman Noggs, as pat as need be.', 'What the deuce is the matter with him? Hark! Is there any noise above?', 'You are wet through, and I--I--haven', 'I have dry clothes, or at least such as will serve my turn well, in my bundle, If you look so distressed to see me, you will add to the pain I feel already, at being compelled, for one night, to cast myself upon your slender means for aid and shelter.', 'Well, both well.', 'They are living in the city still?', 'They are,', 'And my sister, Is she still engaged in the business which she wrote to tell me she thought she should like so much?', 'Now listen to me, s shoulder. ', 'Before I would make an effort to see them, I deemed it expedient to come to you, lest, by gratifying my own selfish desire, I should inflict an injury upon them which I can never repair. What has my uncle heard from Yorkshire?', 'What has he heard? You see that I am prepared to hear the very worst that malice can have suggested. Why should you conceal it from me? I must know it sooner or later; and what purpose can be gained by trifling with the matter for a few minutes, when half the time would put me in possession of all that has occurred? Tell me at once, pray.', 'Tomorrow morning, hear it tomorrow.', 'What purpose would that answer?', 'You would sleep the better,', 'I should sleep the worse, Sleep! Exhausted as I am, and standing in no common need of rest, I cannot hope to close my eyes all night, unless you tell me everything.', 'And if I should tell you everything,', 'Why, then you may rouse my indignation or wound my pride, but you will not break my rest; for if the scene were acted over again, I could take no other part than I have taken; and whatever consequences may accrue to myself from it, I shall never regret doing as I have done--never, if I starve or beg in consequence. What is a little poverty or suffering, to the disgrace of the basest and most inhuman cowardice! I tell you, if I had stood by, tamely and passively, I should have hated myself, and merited the contempt of every man in existence. The black-hearted scoundrel!', 'My dear young man, you mustn s part that', 'The day before yesterday, your uncle received this letter. I took a hasty copy of it, while he was out. Shall I read it?', 'If you please,', 'DOTHEBOYS HALL, ', 'I remain ', 'P.S. I pity his ignorance and despise him.', 'Mr. Noggs,  reflection, ', 'Go out!', 'Yes, to Golden Square. Nobody who knows me would believe this story of the ring; but it may suit the purpose, or gratify the hatred of Mr. Ralph Nickleby to feign to attach credence to it. It is due--not to him, but to myself--that I should state the truth; and moreover, I have a word or two to exchange with him, which will not keep cool.', 'They must,', 'They must not, indeed,', 'Hear me speak, He is not there. He is away from town. He will not be back for three days; and I know that letter will not be answered before he returns.', 'Are you sure of this?', 'Quite, He had hardly read it when he was called away. Its contents are known to nobody but himself and us.', 'Are you certain? not even to my mother or sister? If I thought that they--I will go there--I must see them. Which is the way? Where is it?', 'Now, be advised by me, make no effort to see even them, till he comes home. I know the man. Do not seem to have been tampering with anybody. When he returns, go straight to him, and speak as boldly as you like. Guessing at the real truth, he knows it as well as you or I. Trust him for that.', 'You mean well to me, and should know him better than I can, Well; let it be so.', 'Lor, I  said Mrs. Kenwigs. ', 'Dear me, it d better send up and ask if he won', 'Kenwigs! I', 'What', 'Making such a remark as that, sir, He has had punch already, has he not, sir? I consider the way in which that punch was cut off, if I may use the expression, highly disrespectful to this company; scandalous, perfectly scandalous. It may be the custom to allow such things in this house, but it ve been used to see displayed, and so I don t understand it, that s more, I don s my way to speak my mind, Kenwigs, and that is my mind; and if you don s past my regular time for going to bed, and I can find my way home without making it later.', 'I am very sorry, sir,', 'Don re sorry, You should have prevented it, then.', 'I didn  said that gentleman.  t suppose that such a little thing as a glass of punch would have put you out of temper.', 'Out of temper! What the devil do you mean by that piece of impertinence, Mr. Kenwigs? Morleena, child--give me my hat.', 'Oh, you', 'Morleena, my hat!', 'Why should I stop here, my dears? I', 'Oh, do not speak so cruelly, uncle, unless you wish to kill me.', 'I shouldn  replied Mr Lillyvick, glancing angrily at Kenwigs. ', 'Oh! I cannot bear to see him look so, at my husband, It', 'Mr. Lillyvick, I hope, for the sake of your niece, that you won', 'There, Kenwigs, and let me tell you, at the same time, to show you how much out of temper I was, that if I had gone away without another word, it would have made no difference respecting that pound or two which I shall leave among your children when I die.', 'Morleena Kenwigs, Go down upon your knees to your dear uncle, and beg him to love you all his life through, for he ve always said so.', 'I say! I beg everybody  said Crowl, looking in at this happy juncture;  t it? Noggs has lived in this house, now going on for five years, and nobody has ever been to see him before, within the memory of the oldest inhabitant.', 'It  said the collector; ', 'Well, so it is, and I s more--I think these two geniuses, whoever they are, have run away from somewhere.', 'What makes you think that, sir? You have no reason to suppose that they have run away from anywhere without paying the rates and taxes due, I hope?', 'Why the fact is, s door with all his might and main;  t help catching a word here, and a word there; and all I heard, certainly seemed to refer to their having bolted from some place or other. I don t come from any jail or hospital, and brought away a fever or some unpleasantness of that sort, which might be catching for the children.', 'Mr. Kenwigs, see what it is; make haste! Oh don', 'My baby, my blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed baby! My own darling, sweet, innocent Lillyvick--Oh let me go to him. Let me go-o-o-o!', 'Don  cried Nicholas, running down;  s all out, it s no harm done;', 'It is a mere nothing, the little girl, who was watching the child, being tired I suppose, fell asleep, and set her hair on fire.', 'Oh you malicious little wretch!', 'I heard her cries, and ran down, in time to prevent her setting fire to anything else. You may depend upon it that the child is not hurt; for I took it off the bed myself, and brought it here to convince you.', 'And whatever we are to say to you, sir, s deliverer,  t know.', 'You need say nothing at all, I have done nothing to found any very strong claim upon your eloquence, I am sure.', 'He might have been burnt to death, if it hadn', 'Not very likely, I think, for there was abundance of assistance here, which must have reached him before he had been in any danger.', 'You will let us drink your health, anyvays, sir!', '--In my absence, by all means, I have had a very fatiguing journey, and should be most indifferent company--a far greater check upon your merriment, than a promoter of it, even if I kept awake, which I think very doubtful. If you will allow me, I', 'I have had a very fatiguing journey, and should be most indifferent company--a far greater check upon your merriment, than a promoter of it, even if I kept awake, which I think very doubtful. If you will allow me, I', 'What a delightful young man!', 'Uncommon gentlemanly, really, Don', 'Yes, He is gentlemanly, very gentlemanly--in appearance.', 'I hope you don', 'No, my dear, no. I trust he may not turn out--well--no matter--my love to you, my dear, and long life to the baby!', 'Your namesake,', 'And I hope a worthy namesake, I hope a baby as will never disgrace his godfather, and as may be considered, in arter years, of a piece with the Lillyvicks whose name he bears. I do say--and Mrs. Kenwigs is of the same sentiment, and feels it as strong as I do--that I consider his being called Lillyvick one of the greatest blessings and Honours of my existence.', 'THE greatest blessing, Kenwigs,', 'THE greatest blessing, A blessing that I hope, one of these days, I may be able to deserve.', 'Who, I don  observed Mr. Lillyvick, as a great concession, ', 'He has a very nice face and style, really,', 'He certainly has, There s that word again?', 'What word?', 'Why--dear me, how stupid I am, What do you call it, when Lords break off door-knockers and beat policemen, and play at coaches with other people', 'What do you call it, when Lords break off door-knockers and beat policemen, and play at coaches with other people', 'Aristocratic?', 'Ah! aristocratic, something very aristocratic about him, isn', 'Cook, Tom,', 'Cook, Well!', 'Read out an easy place or two,', 'Pick out very light ones, if you please, young man,', '"Mrs. Marker," "Russell Place, Russell Square; offers eighteen guineas; tea and sugar found. Two in family, and see very little company. Five servants kept. No man. No followers."', 'Oh Lor! THAT won', '"Mrs. Wrymug," "Pleasant Place, Finsbury. Wages, twelve guineas. No tea, no sugar. Serious family--"', 'Ah! you needn', '"Three serious footmen,"', 'Three? did you say?', 'Three serious footmen, "Cook, housemaid, and nursemaid; each female servant required to join the Little Bethel Congregation three times every Sunday--with a serious footman. If the cook is more serious than the footman, she will be expected to improve the footman; if the footman is more serious than the cook, he will be expected to improve the cook."', 'I  said the client;  t know but what it mightn', 'Here  remarked Tom, turning over the leaves.  s Day, with the exception of dinner for Mr. and Mrs. Gallanbile, which, being a work of piety and necessity, is exempted. Mr. Gallanbile dines late on the day of rest, in order to prevent the sinfulness of the cook', 'I don ll answer as well as the other, I t do.', 'When is she coming again, Tom?', 'Tomorrow morning,', 'Where have you sent her to?', 'Mrs. Clark', 'She', 'Any such! a-dozen-such. An', 'I should think so,', 'I don d settle them himself with the party, but they must be pretty good ones, because he', 'I don  said Tom;  t a large place; and if the worst comes to the worst it won t she?', 'What girl?', 'Oh yes. I know--what gal, eh? You didn t--I say, don', 'Gentlemen, you are welcome. I am rejoiced to see you.', 'Now, gentlemen, you are dissatisfied with my conduct, I see by the newspapers.', 'Yes, Mr. Gregsbury, we are,', 'Do my eyes deceive me, or is that my old friend Pugstyles?', 'or is that my old friend Pugstyles?', 'I am that man, and no other, sir,', 'Give me your hand, my worthy friend, Pugstyles, my dear friend, I am very sorry to see you here.', 'I am very sorry to be here, sir, but your conduct, Mr. Gregsbury, has rendered this deputation from your constituents imperatively necessary.', 'My conduct, Pugstyles, my conduct has been, and ever will be, regulated by a sincere regard for the true and real interests of this great and happy country. Whether I look at home, or abroad; whether I behold the peaceful industrious communities of our island home: her rivers covered with steamboats, her roads with locomotives, her streets with cabs, her skies with balloons of a power and magnitude hitherto unknown in the history of aeronautics in this or any other nation--I say, whether I look merely at home, or, stretching my eyes farther, contemplate the boundless prospect of conquest and possession--achieved by British perseverance and British valour--which is outspread before me, I clasp my hands, and turning my eyes to the broad expanse above my head, exclaim, "Thank Heaven, I am a Briton!"', 'The meaning of that term--gammon, is unknown to me. If it means that I grow a little too fervid, or perhaps even hyperbolical, in extolling my native land, I admit the full justice of the remark. I AM proud of this free and happy country. My form dilates, my eye glistens, my breast heaves, my heart swells, my bosom burns, when I call to mind her greatness and her glory.', 'We wish, sir, to ask you a few questions.', 'If you please, gentlemen; my time is yours--and my country s--', 'Question number one.--Whether, sir, you did not give a voluntary pledge previous to your election, that in event of your being returned, you would immediately put down the practice of coughing and groaning in the House of Commons. And whether you did not submit to be coughed and groaned down in the very first debate of the session, and have since made no effort to effect a reform in this respect? Whether you did not also pledge yourself to astonish the government, and make them shrink in their shoes? And whether you have astonished them, and made them shrink in their shoes, or not?', 'Go on to the next one, my dear Pugstyles,', 'Have you any explanation to offer with reference to that question, sir?', 'Certainly not,', 'Question number two.--Whether, sir, you did not likewise give a voluntary pledge that you would support your colleague on every occasion; and whether you did not, the night before last, desert him and vote upon the other side, because the wife of a leader on that other side had invited Mrs. Gregsbury to an evening party?', 'Go on,', 'Nothing to say on that, either, sir?', 'Nothing whatever,', 'Question number three--and last, Whether, sir, you did not state upon the hustings, that it was your firm and determined intention to oppose everything proposed; to divide the house upon every question, to move for returns on every subject, to place a motion on the books every day, and, in short, in your own memorable words, to play the very devil with everything and everybody?', 'Whether, sir, you did not state upon the hustings, that it was your firm and determined intention to oppose everything proposed; to divide the house upon every question, to move for returns on every subject, to place a motion on the books every day, and, in short, in your own memorable words, to play the very devil with everything and everybody?', 'I am requested, sir, to express a hope, that on receiving a requisition to that effect from a great majority of your constituents, you will not object at once to resign your seat in favour of some candidate whom they think they can better trust.', 'Next to the welfare of our beloved island--this great and free and happy country, whose powers and resources are, I sincerely believe, illimitable--I value that noble independence which is an Englishman', 'With great esteem,  &c.&c.', 'Then you will not resign, under any circumstances?', 'Then, good-morning, sir,', 'Heaven bless you!', 'What', 'What do you do here, sir? a spy upon my privacy! A concealed voter! You have heard my answer, sir. Pray follow the deputation.', 'I should have done so, if I had belonged to it, but I do not,', 'Then how came you here, sir? And where the devil have you come from, sir?', 'I brought this card from the General Agency Office, sir, wishing to offer myself as your secretary, and understanding that you stood in need of one.', 'That', 'You have no connection with any of those rascally papers have you? You didn', 'I have no connection, I am sorry to say, with anything at present,', 'Oh! How did you find your way up here, then?', 'That was the way, was it? Sit down.', 'You want to be my secretary, do you?', 'I wish to be employed in that capacity, sir,', 'Well, now what can you do?', 'I suppose, that I can do what usually falls to the lot of other secretaries.', 'What', 'What is it?', 'Ah! What is it?', 'A secretary  said Nicholas, considering. ', 'Good,', 'The arrangement of papers and documents?', 'Very good.', 'Occasionally, perhaps, the writing from your dictation; and possibly, sir, the copying of your speech for some public journal, when you have made one of more than usual importance.', 'Certainly, What else?', 'Really, s reflection, ', 'This is all very well, Mr--what is your name?', 'Nickleby.', 'This is all very well, Mr. Nickleby, and very proper, so far as it goes--so far as it goes, but it doesn', 'I beg your pardon,', '--To be crammed, sir,', 'May I beg your pardon again, if I inquire what you mean, sir?', 'My meaning, sir, is perfectly plain, My secretary would have to make himself master of the foreign policy of the world, as it is mirrored in the newspapers; to run his eye over all accounts of public meetings, all leading articles, and accounts of the proceedings of public bodies; and to make notes of anything which it appeared to him might be made a point of, in any little speech upon the question of some petition lying on the table, or anything of that kind. Do you understand?', 'I think I do, sir,', 'Then, it would be necessary for him to make himself acquainted, from day to day, with newspaper paragraphs on passing events; such as "Mysterious disappearance, and supposed suicide of a potboy," or anything of that sort, upon which I might found a question to the Secretary of State for the Home Department. Then, he would have to copy the question, and as much as I remembered of the answer (including a little compliment about independence and good sense); and to send the manuscript in a frank to the local paper, with perhaps half-a-dozen lines of leader, to the effect, that I was always to be found in my place in parliament, and never shrunk from the responsible and arduous duties, and so forth. You see?', 'Besides which, I should expect him, now and then, to go through a few figures in the printed tables, and to pick out a few results, so that I might come out pretty well on timber duty questions, and finance questions, and so on; and I should like him to get up a few little arguments about the disastrous effects of a return to cash payments and a metallic currency, with a touch now and then about the exportation of bullion, and the Emperor of Russia, and bank notes, and all that kind of thing, which it', 'I think I understand,', 'With regard to such questions as are not political, and which one can s, might belong to one man, or one family; but that the creations of the brain, being God t be expected to know anything about me or my jokes either--do you see?', 'I see that, sir,', 'You must always bear in mind, in such cases as this, where our interests are not affected, to put it very strong about the people, because it comes out very well at election-time; and you could be as funny as you liked about the authors; because I believe the greater part of them live in lodgings, and are not voters. This is a hasty outline of the chief things you You see that gentleman, with his hand to his face, and his arm twisted round the pillar--that --with any other little eulogium that might strike you at the moment. And for salary, and for salary, I don s more than I', 'Fifteen shillings a week is not much,', 'Not much! Fifteen shillings a week not much, young man? Fifteen shillings a--', 'Pray do not suppose that I quarrel with the sum, sir, for I am not ashamed to confess, that whatever it may be in itself, to me it is a great deal. But the duties and responsibilities make the recompense small, and they are so very heavy that I fear to undertake them.', 'Do you decline to undertake them, sir?', 'I fear they are too great for my powers, however good my will may be, sir,', 'That is as much as to say that you had rather not accept the place, and that you consider fifteen shillings a week too little, Do you decline it, sir?', 'I have no alternative but to do so,', 'Door, Matthews!', 'I am sorry I have troubled you unnecessarily, sir,', 'I am sorry you have, Door, Matthews!', 'Door, Matthews!', 'Good-morning, sir,', 'Door, Matthews!', 'Come back?', 'Yes, tired to death: and, what is worse, might have remained at home for all the good I have done.', 'Couldn', 'Maybe so, but I am sanguine, and did expect, and am proportionately disappointed.', 'If I could do anything, anything, however slight, until Ralph Nickleby returns, and I have eased my mind by confronting him, I should feel happier. I should think it no disgrace to work, Heaven knows. Lying indolently here, like a half-tamed sullen beast, distracts me.', 'I don  said Newman;  t like them; no, you could hardly be expected to undergo it--no, no.', 'What could I hardly be expected to undergo? Show me, in this wide waste of London, any honest means by which I could even defray the weekly hire of this poor room, and see if I shrink from resorting to them! Undergo! I have undergone too much, my friend, to feel pride or squeamishness now. Except-- except such squeamishness as is common honesty, and so much pride as constitutes self-respect. I see little to choose, between assistant to a brutal pedagogue, and toad-eater to a mean and ignorant upstart, be he member or no member.', 'I hardly know whether I should tell you what I heard this morning, or not,', 'Has it reference to what you said just now?', 'It has.', 'Then in Heaven  said Nicholas.  s sake consider my deplorable condition; and, while I promise to take no step without taking counsel with you, give me, at least, a vote in my own behalf.', 'Which, unless I am very much mistaken, will not be very long; for such clever children, Mr Noggs, never were born into this world, I do believe.', 'There, that s beneath you, I know; but I thought that perhaps you might--', 'Might! of course I shall. I accept the offer at once. Tell the worthy mother so, without delay, my dear fellow; and that I am ready to begin whenever she pleases.', 'How do you do, Mr. Johnson? Uncle--Mr. Johnson.', 'How do you do, sir?', 'Mr. Johnson is engaged as private master to the children, uncle,', 'So you said just now, my dear,', 'But I hope, that that will not make them proud; but that they will bless their own good fortune, which has born them superior to common people', 'Yes, ma,', 'And when you go out in the streets, or elsewhere, I desire that you don  said Mrs. Kenwigs;  t say no more than "We t proud, because ma says it', 'Yes, ma,', 'Then mind you recollect, and do as I tell you, Shall Mr. Johnson begin, uncle?', 'Shall Mr. Johnson begin, uncle?', 'I am ready to hear, if Mr. Johnson is ready to commence, my dear, What sort of language do you consider French, sir?', 'How do you mean?', 'Do you consider it a good language, sir? a pretty language, a sensible language?', 'A pretty language, certainly, and as it has a name for everything, and admits of elegant conversation about everything, I presume it is a sensible one.', 'I don  said Mr. Lillyvick, doubtfully. ', 'Yes, I should say it was, certainly.', 'It  said the collector, ', 'Was it a dismal one in your time?', 'Very, It ve heard the French prisoners, who were natives, and ought to know how to speak it, talking in such a dismal manner, that it made one miserable to hear them. Ay, that I have, fifty times, sir--fifty times!', 'What', 'L', 'Ah! I thought as much. Lo, eh? I don', 'I suppose the children may begin, uncle?', 'Oh yes; they may begin, my dear, I have no wish to prevent them.', 'Is Madame Mantalini in?', 'Not often out at this time, miss,', 'Can I see her?', 'Eh? Lord, no.', 'I came by her own appointment, I am--I am--to be employed here.', 'Oh! you should have rung the worker  said the footman, touching the handle of one in the door-post. ', 'Yes,', 'You  said the man. ', 'If you  said the man,  ll tell her presently.', 'If you will be odiously, demnebly, outr_i_geously jealous, my soul, you will be very miserable--horrid miserable--demnition miserable.', 'I AM miserable,', 'Then you are an ungrateful, unworthy, demd unthankful little fairy,', 'I am not,', 'Do not put itself out of humour, It is a pretty, bewitching little demd countenance, and it should not be out of humour, for it spoils its loveliness, and makes it cross and gloomy like a frightful, naughty, demd hobgoblin.', 'It is a pretty, bewitching little demd countenance, and it should not be out of humour, for it spoils its loveliness, and makes it cross and gloomy like a frightful, naughty, demd hobgoblin.', 'I am not to be brought round in that way, always,', 'It shall be brought round in any way it likes best, and not brought round at all if it likes that better,', 'It', 'Not so easy when one is eating a demnition egg, for the yolk runs down the waistcoat, and yolk of egg does not match any waistcoat but a yellow waistcoat, demmit.', 'for the yolk runs down the waistcoat, and yolk of egg does not match any waistcoat but a yellow waistcoat, demmit.', 'You were flirting with her during the whole night,', 'No, no, my life.', 'You were, I had my eye upon you all the time.', 'Bless the little winking twinkling eye; was it on me all the time! Oh, demmit!', 'And I say once more, that you ought not to waltz with anybody but your own wife; and I will not bear it, Mantalini, if I take poison first.', 'She will not take poison and have horrid pains, will she? She will not take poison, because she had a demd fine husband who might have married two countesses and a dowager--', 'Two countesses, You told me one before!', 'Two! Two demd fine women, real countesses and splendid fortunes, demmit.', 'And why didn', 'Why didn  replied her husband. ', 'And what about the cash, my existence  said Mantalini, when these endearments ceased. ', 'Very little indeed,', 'We must have some more, we must have some discount out of old Nickleby to carry on the war with, demmit.', 'You can', 'My life and soul, there is a horse for sale at Scrubbs  joy, for nothing.', 'For nothing, I am glad of that.', 'For actually nothing, A hundred guineas down will buy him; mane, and crest, and legs, and tail, all of the demdest beauty. I will ride him in the park before the very chariots of the rejected countesses. The demd old dowager will faint with grief and rage; the other two will say "He is married, he has made away with himself, it is a demd thing, it is all up!" They will hate each other demnebly, and wish you dead and buried. Ha! ha! Demmit.', 'Dear me, child! How came you here?', 'How came you here?', 'Child! How came--eh!--oh--demmit, how d', 'I have been waiting, here some time, ma  said Kate, addressing Madame Mantalini. ', 'You really must see to that man, He forgets everything.', 'He forgets everything.', 'I will twist his demd nose off his countenance for leaving such a very pretty creature all alone by herself,', 'Mantalini, you forget yourself.', 'I don  said Mantalini, kissing his wife', 'Oh, Miss Knag, this is the young person I spoke to you about.', 'I think that, for the present at all events, it will be better for Miss Nickleby to come into the show-room with you, and try things on for people, She will not be able for the present to be of much use in any other way; and her appearance will--', 'Suit very well with mine, Madame Mantalini, So it will; and to be sure I might have known that you would not be long in finding that out; for you have so much taste in all those matters, that really, as I often say to the young ladies, I do not know how, when, or where, you possibly could have acquired all you know--hem--Miss Nickleby and I are quite a pair, Madame Mantalini, only I am a little darker than Miss Nickleby, and--hem--I think my foot may be a little smaller. Miss Nickleby, I am sure, will not be offended at my saying that, when she hears that our family always have been celebrated for small feet ever since--hem--ever since our family had any feet at all, indeed, I think. I had an uncle once, Madame Mantalini, who lived in Cheltenham, and had a most excellent business as a tobacconist--hem--who had such small feet, that they were no bigger than those which are usually joined to wooden legs--the most symmetrical feet, Madame Mantalini, that even you can imagine.', 'They must have had something of the appearance of club feet, Miss Knag,', 'Well now, that is so like you, Ha! ha! ha! Of club feet! Oh very good! As I often remark to the young ladies, "Well I must say, and I do not care who knows it, of all the ready humour--hem--I ever heard anywhere"--and I have heard a good deal; for when my dear brother was alive (I kept house for him, Miss Nickleby), we had to supper once a week two or three young men, highly celebrated in those days for their humour, Madame Mantalini--"Of all the ready humour," I say to the young ladies, "I ever heard, Madame Mantalini', 'You  said Madame Mantalini;  ll leave her with you. You', 'Charming creature, isn', 'I have seen very little of her, I hardly know yet.', 'Have you seen Mr. Mantalini?', 'Yes; I have seen him twice.', 'Isn', 'Indeed he does not strike me as being so, by any means,', 'No, my dear! Why, goodness gracious mercy, where', 'I dare say I am very foolish, but as my opinion is of very little importance to him or anyone else, I do not regret having formed it, and shall be slow to change it, I think.', 'but as my opinion is of very little importance to him or anyone else, I do not regret having formed it, and shall be slow to change it, I think.', 'He is a very fine man, don', 'Indeed he may be, for anything I could say to the contrary,', 'And drives very beautiful horses, doesn', 'I dare say he may, but I never saw them,', 'Never saw them! Oh, well! There it is at once you know; how can you possibly pronounce an opinion about a gentleman--hem--if you don', 'I do indeed,', 'So dusty and hot,', 'I am very sorry to have wounded you by my thoughtless speech, I did not think of it. You are in mourning for some near relation?', 'For my father,', 'For what relation, Miss Simmonds?', 'Her father,', 'Her father, eh? Ah! A long illness, Miss Simmonds?', 'Hush, I don', 'Our misfortune was very sudden, or I might perhaps, at a time like this, be enabled to support it better.', 'Bless my soul, Kate, I s cousin', 'Dear Nicholas! s letter from Dotheboys Hall. ', 'Well, now, indeed, Madame Mantalini, that Miss Nickleby is a very creditable young person--a very creditable young person indeed--hem--upon my word, Madame Mantalini, it does very extraordinary credit even to your discrimination that you should have found such a very excellent, very well-behaved, very--hem--very unassuming young woman to assist in the fitting on. I have seen some young women when they had the opportunity of displaying before their betters, behave in such a--oh, dear--well--but you', 'that Miss Nickleby is a very creditable young person--a very creditable young person indeed--hem--upon my word, Madame Mantalini, it does very extraordinary credit even to your discrimination that you should have found such a very excellent, very well-behaved, very--hem--very unassuming young woman to assist in the fitting on. I have seen some young women when they had the opportunity of displaying before their betters, behave in such a--oh, dear--well--but you', 'Beyond putting a very excellent client out of humour, Miss Nickleby has not done anything very remarkable today--that I am aware of, at least,', 'Oh, dear! but you must allow a great deal for inexperience, you know.', 'And youth?', 'Oh, I say nothing about that, Madame Mantalini, because if youth were any excuse, you wouldn', 'Quite so good a forewoman as I have, I suppose,', 'Well, I never did know anybody like you, Madame Mantalini, and that s going to say, before it has time to rise to one', 'For myself, I consider Miss Nickleby the most awkward girl I ever saw in my life.', 'Poor dear thing, it s her misfortune, Madame Mantalini, why really you know, as the man said about the blind horse, we ought to respect it.', 'Her uncle told me she had been considered pretty, I think her one of the most ordinary girls I ever met with.', 'Ordinary! and awkward! Well, all I can say is, Madame Mantalini, that I quite love the poor girl; and that if she was twice as indifferent-looking, and twice as awkward as she is, I should be only so much the more her friend, and that', 'But now, I love her--I quite love her--I declare I do!', 'I take quite a lively interest in you, my dear soul, upon my word, a sister s the most singular circumstance I ever knew.', 'Bless you! s work, ', 'I fear your kind and open communication, which has rendered me more painfully conscious of my own defects, has not improved me,', 'No, no, I dare say not, But how much better that you should know it at first, and so be able to go on, straight and comfortable! Which way are you walking, my love?', 'Towards the city,', 'The city! Goodness gracious me! now do you really live in the city?', 'Is it so very unusual for anybody to live there?', 'I couldn', 'Reduced--I should say poor people, must live where they can.', 'Ah! very true, so they must; very proper indeed! s small change in general society;  s what I very often tell my brother, when our servants go away ill, one after another, and he thinks the back-kitchen em to sleep in. These sort of people, I tell him, are glad to sleep anywhere! Heaven suits the back to the burden. What a nice thing it is to think that it should be so, isn', 'em to sleep in. These sort of people, I tell him, are glad to sleep anywhere! Heaven suits the back to the burden. What a nice thing it is to think that it should be so, isn', 'Very,', 'I  said Miss Knag,  s quite dark, and our last servant went to the hospital a week ago, with St Anthony', 'I fear, that mama--my mother, I mean--is waiting for me.', 'You needn  said Miss Knag, smiling sweetly as she spoke; ', 'I have taken such a fancy to your daughter, Mrs. Nickleby, you can', 'I am delighted to hear it, though it is nothing new to me, that even strangers should like Kate.', 'Hem!', 'You will like her better when you know how good she is, It is a great blessing to me, in my misfortunes, to have a child, who knows neither pride nor vanity, and whose bringing-up might very well have excused a little of both at first. You don', 'Kate has improved even in this little time, I have no doubt,', 'Oh! of course,', 'And will improve still more,', 'That she will, I  replied Miss Knag, squeezing Kate', 'She always was clever, always, from a baby. I recollect when she was only two years and a half old, that a gentleman who used to visit very much at our house--Mr Watkins, you know, Kate, my dear, that your poor papa went bail for, who afterwards ran away to the United States, and sent us a pair of snow shoes, with such an affectionate letter that it made your poor dear father cry for a week. You remember the letter? In which he said that he was very sorry he couldn t forget you were his god-daughter, and he should take it very unkind if we didn', 'always, from a baby. I recollect when she was only two years and a half old, that a gentleman who used to visit very much at our house--Mr Watkins, you know, Kate, my dear, that your poor papa went bail for, who afterwards ran away to the United States, and sent us a pair of snow shoes, with such an affectionate letter that it made your poor dear father cry for a week. You remember the letter? In which he said that he was very sorry he couldn t forget you were his god-daughter, and he should take it very unkind if we didn', 'Yes, yes, mama; what of him?', 'Why, that Mr. Watkins, my dear, that Mr. Watkins--he wasn t remember whether it was the Old Boar or the George the Third, but it was one of the two, I know, and it t at all fond of children, and couldn', 'Don  said Miss Knag,  ll drive me crazy, perfectly crazy. My mama--hem--was the most lovely and beautiful creature, with the most striking and exquisite--hem--the most exquisite nose that ever was put upon a human face, I do believe, Mrs Nickleby (here Miss Knag rubbed her own nose sympathetically); the most delightful and accomplished woman, perhaps, that ever was seen; but she had that one failing of lending money, and carried it to such an extent that she lent--hem--oh! thousands of pounds, all our little fortunes, and what t think, if we were to live till--till--hem--till the very end of time, that we should ever get them back again. I don', 'Don  said Miss Knag as they entered the shop.  s only one of our young ladies and her mother. Mrs. and Miss Nickleby.', 'It', 'Oh, indeed! Ah!', 'Past ten, Thomas, close the warehouse.', 'Ah! Well--yes--I believe supper is ready, sister.', 'Mrs. Blockson, how very often I have begged you not to come into the room with your bonnet on!', 'I can  said the charwoman, bridling up on the shortest notice.  s been a deal o t like it, I must trouble you to look out for somebody else, for it don s the truth, if I was to be hung this minute.', 'I don  said Miss Knag, with a strong emphasis on the personal pronoun. ', 'No there is not, indeed, Miss Knag, and so I won', 'Then why isn', 'Because there arn t I won', 'Will you hold your tongue--female?', 'By your leave, Mr. Knag, I m spoke to, sir; and with regard to being a female, sir, I should wish to know what you considered yourself?', 'I m spoke to, sir; and with regard to being a female, sir, I should wish to know what you considered yourself?', 'A miserable wretch, A miserable wretch.', 'I t call yourself out of your name, sir, and as I had two twin children the day before yesterday was only seven weeks, and my little Charley fell down a airy and put his elber out, last Monday, I shall take it as a favour if you s work, to my house, afore the clock strikes ten tomorrow.', 'What is the matter with that gentleman, pray?', 'Is he ill?', 'Hush! a most melancholy history. He was once most devotedly attached to--hem--to Madame Mantalini.', 'Bless me!', 'Yes, and received great encouragement too, and confidently hoped to marry her. He has a most romantic heart, Mrs. Nickleby, as indeed--hem--as indeed all our family have, and the disappointment was a dreadful blow. He is a wonderfully accomplished man--most extraordinarily accomplished--reads--hem--reads every novel that comes out; I mean every novel that--hem--that has any fashion in it, of course. The fact is, that he did find so much in the books he read, applicable to his own misfortunes, and did find himself in every respect so much like the heroes--because of course he is conscious of his own superiority, as we all are, and very naturally--that he took to scorning everything, and became a genius; and I am quite sure that he is, at this very present moment, writing another book.', 'Another book!', 'Yes, another book, in three volumes post octavo. Of course it s so wrapped up in high life, that the least allusion to business or worldly matters--like that woman just now, for instance--quite distracts him; but, as I often say, I think his disappointment a great thing for him, because if he hadn t have written about blighted hopes and all that; and the fact is, if it hadn t believe his genius would ever have come out at all.', 'A most elegant appearance,', 'I never saw anything so exquisite in all my life,', 'Madame Mantalini,', 'Ma', 'Pray have up that pretty young creature we saw yesterday.', 'Oh yes, do,', 'Of all things in the world, Madame Mantalini, s intended, throwing herself languidly on a sofa, ', 'By all means, the lovely young creature, by all means.', 'Everybody is talking about her, and my lord, being a great admirer of beauty, must positively see her.', 'She IS universally admired, Miss Knag, send up Miss Nickleby. You needn', 'I beg your pardon, Madame Mantalini, what did you say last?', 'You needn', 'Why, how you colour, child!', 'She is not quite so accustomed to her business, as she will be in a week or two,', 'I am afraid you have been giving her some of your wicked looks, my lord,', 'No, no, no, no, no, I', 'I hope you don', 'Not by any means, or you would have left it long ago.', 'You naughty creature, I won', 'You will see that those little alterations are made, Madame Mantalini, Nay, you bad man, you positively shall go first; I wouldn', 'Foh! how he ever gets into a carriage without thinking of a hearse, I can', 'Bless me! what is the matter?', 'What is a shame? What is the matter? What has happened? tell me.', 'Matter! matter! Fie upon you, you nasty creature!', 'Gracious! s closed teeth; ', 'have I offended you?', 'YOU offended me! YOU! a chit, a child, an upstart nobody! Oh, indeed! Ha, ha!', 'Here she is, here she is--everybody is talking about her--the belle, ladies--the beauty, the--oh, you bold-faced thing!', 'here she is--everybody is talking about her--the belle, ladies--the beauty, the--oh, you bold-faced thing!', 'For fifteen years, for fifteen years have I been the credit and ornament of this room and the one upstairs. Thank God, I have never in all that time, till now, been exposed to the arts, the vile arts, of a creature, who disgraces us with all her proceedings, and makes proper people blush for themselves. But I feel it, I do feel it, although I am disgusted.', 'Have I lived to this day to be called a fright!', 'Oh no, no, pray don t now!', 'Have I deserved to be called an elderly person?', 'Don', 'I hate her, I detest and hate her. Never let her speak to me again; never let anybody who is a friend of mine speak to her; a slut, a hussy, an impudent artful hussy!', 'Ah! my dear! we were at that moment talking about you.', 'Indeed!', 'That instant, I was coming to call for you, making sure to catch you before you left; but your mother and I have been talking over family affairs, and the time has slipped away so rapidly--', 'Well, now, hasn  interposed Mrs. Nickleby, quite insensible to the sarcastic tone of Ralph Upon my word, I couldn re to dine with your uncle at half-past six o', 'Let me see, Your black silk frock will be quite dress enough, my dear, with that pretty little scarf, and a plain band in your hair, and a pair of black silk stock--Dear, dear, if I had but those unfortunate amethysts of mine--you recollect them, Kate, my love--how they used to sparkle, you know--but your papa, your poor dear papa--ah! there never was anything so cruelly sacrificed as those jewels were, never!', 'Lord, Kate, my dear, how like a child you talk! Four-and-twenty silver tea-spoons, brother-in-law, two gravies, four salts, all the amethysts--necklace, brooch, and ear-rings--all made away with, at the same time, and I saying, almost on my bended knees, to that poor good soul, "Why don t you make some arrangement?" I am sure that anybody who was about us at that time, will do me the justice to own, that if I said that once, I said it fifty times a day. Didn', 'No, no, mama, never,', 'Ah! if my advice had been taken at the beginning--Well, I have always done MY duty, and that', 'Now, to return to the point from which we have strayed. I have a little party of--of--gentlemen with whom I am connected in business just now, at my house tomorrow; and your mother has promised that you shall keep house for me. I am not much used to parties; but this is one of business, and such fooleries are an important part of it sometimes. You don', 'Mind! My dear Kate, why--', 'Pray, I spoke to my niece.', 'I shall be very glad, of course, uncle, but I am afraid you will find me awkward and embarrassed.', 'Oh no, come when you like, in a hackney coach--I', 'What a very strongly marked countenance your uncle has! I don', 'Mama! To think of such a thing!', 'No, There certainly is none. But it', 'What has come over you, my dear, in the name of goodness?', 'I was only thinking, mama,', 'Thinking! Ay, and indeed plenty to think about, too. Your uncle has taken a strong fancy to you, that t come to you, after this, I shall be a little surprised, that', 'I couldn  he said, in a low tone, and pointing, as he spoke, to the next room. ', 'Pray, uncle, are there any ladies here?', 'No, I don', 'Must I go in immediately?', 'As you please, They are all come, and dinner will be announced directly afterwards--that', 'Lord Frederick Verisopht, my niece, Miss Nickleby.', 'Eh! What--the--deyvle!', 'My niece, my lord,', 'Then my ears did not deceive me, and it  said his lordship.  m very happy. deyvlish pitty.', 'Introduce me, Nickleby,', 'Sir Mulberry Hawk,', 'Otherwise the most knowing card in the pa-ack, Miss Nickleby,', 'Don', 'Mr. Pyke,', 'Nor me, Nickleby,', 'Mr. Pluck,', 'An unexpected playsure, Nickleby,', 'Designed to surprise you, Lord Frederick,', 'Not a bad idea, and one that would almost warrant the addition of an extra two and a half per cent.', 'Nickleby, take the hint, and tack it on the other five-and-twenty, or whatever it is, and give me half for the advice.', 'No, damn it, Verisopht, fair play', 'Ha, ha, ha! very good, very good.', 'Oh, you', 'Of course, how can you a-ask me?', 'how can you a-ask me?', 'Well, you attend to your dinner, and don', 'I wish you', 'What is the matter, my lord?', 'This fellow, Hawk, is monopolising your niece,', 'He has a tolerable share of everything that you lay claim to, my lord,', "'Gad, so he has, deyvle take me if I know which is master in my house, he or I.", 'I know,', 'I think I shall cut him off with a shilling,', 'No, no, curse it, When you come to the shilling--the last shilling--I ll never leave you--you may take your oath of it.', 'Well, if this is a discounting dinner, all I have to say is, deyvle take me, if it wouldn', 'You  returned Sir Mulberry Hawk; ', 'Nickleby will tell you that.', 'What do you say, Nickleby? am I to be a good customer?', 'It depends entirely on circumstances, my lord,', 'On your lordship', 'Here is Miss Nickleby, wondering why the deuce somebody doesn', 'No, indeed, I--', 'I  said Sir Mulberry,  t look in my face, and tell me she wasn', 'Done! Within ten minutes.', 'Done!', 'Pray, Pray do not make me the subject of any bets. Uncle, I cannot really--', 'Why not, my dear? It is done in a moment; there is nothing in it. If the gentlemen insist on it--', 'I don  said Sir Mulberry, with a loud laugh.  s making the denial, for if she does, I lose; but I shall be glad to see her bright eyes, especially as she favours the mahogany so much.', 'So she does, and it', 'Quite cruel,', 'Horrid cruel,', 'I don  said Sir Mulberry;  s eyes is worth double the money.', 'More,', 'Far more,', 'How goes the enemy, Snobb?', 'Four minutes gone.', 'Bravo!', 'Won', 'You needn  said Sir Mulberry;  t a chance, old fellow. Time, Snobb?', 'Miss Nickleby and I understand each other; she declares on my side, and shows her taste. You haven', 'Eight minutes gone.', 'Get the money ready, you', 'Ha, ha, ha!', 'Capital!', 'That ll drink her health.', 'What a delightful studiousness! Was it real, now, or only to display the eyelashes?', 'I have looked at   said Sir Mulberry.  re perfect. Why did I speak, and destroy such a pretty little picture?', 'Do me the favour to be silent now, sir,', 'No, don  said Sir Mulberry, folding his crushed hat to lay his elbow on, and bringing himself still closer to the young lady;  t to. Such a devoted slave of yours, Miss Nickleby--it', 'I wish you to understand, sir, that your behaviour offends and disgusts me. If you have a spark of gentlemanly feeling remaining, you will leave me.', 'Now why, why will you keep up this appearance of excessive rigour, my sweet creature? Now, be more natural--my dear Miss Nickleby, be more natural--do.', 'Let me go, sir, Do you hear? Instantly--this moment.', 'Sit down, sit down, I want to talk to you.', 'Unhand me, sir, this instant,', 'Not for the world,', 'What is this?', 'It is this, sir, that beneath the roof where I, a helpless girl, your dead brother', 'Your way lies there, sir,', 'What do you mean by that?', 'Do you know me, you old madman?', 'Well,', 'You wanted the lord, did you? Damme, I was in the way, was I?', 'Who brought him to you first? and how, without me, could you ever have wound him in your net as you have?', 'The net is a large one, and rather full, Take care that it chokes nobody in the meshes.', 'You would sell your flesh and blood for money; yourself, if you have not already made a bargain with the devil, Do you mean to tell me that your pretty niece was not brought here as a decoy for the drunken boy downstairs?', 'Do you mean to tell me, that it is not so? Do you mean to say that if he had found his way up here instead of me, you wouldn', 'I tell you this, that if I brought her here, as a matter of business--', 'Ay, that  interposed Sir Mulberry, with a laugh.  re coming to yourself again now.', '--As a matter of business, because I thought she might make some impression on the silly youth you have taken in hand and are lending good help to ruin, I knew--knowing him--that it would be long before he outraged her girl s niece. But if I thought to draw him on more gently by this device, I did not think of subjecting the girl to the licentiousness and brutality of so old a hand as you. And now we understand each other.', 'Especially as there was nothing to be got by it--eh?', 'Exactly so,', 'Hush, my dear! Hush, hush! Don t think of it.', 'Oh, for pity  cried Kate. ', 'Yes, yes, You shall. But you must dry your eyes first, and compose yourself. Let me raise your head. There--there.', 'Oh, uncle! What have I done--what have I done--that you should subject me to this? If I had wronged you in thought, or word, or deed, it would have been most cruel to me, and the memory of one you must have loved in some old time; but--', 'Only listen to me for a moment, I didn', 'I will do anything, if you will only send me home.', 'Well, well, I will, but you must get back your own looks; for those you have, will frighten them, and nobody must know of this but you and I. Now let us walk the other way. There. You look better even now.', 'I don  said Miss La Creevy.  t occasion red eyes. She must have been crying.', 'I can  said the little portrait painter. ', 'So far as I am concerned, I could spare Miss Nickleby for evermore.', 'Oh, indeed, ma  rejoined Miss La Creevy, highly offended.  s of no great consequence.', 'Very good, ma  said Miss Knag. ', 'No, I have not, ma', 'Then good-morning, ma', 'Good-morning to you, ma', 'I wonder who that is, A nice person to know, I should think! I wish I had the painting of her: I  So, feeling quite satisfied that she had said a very cutting thing at Miss Knag', 'Here, take  em into the bedroom; anywhere, Dear, dear; to think that I should be late on this particular morning, of all others, after being ready for three weeks by half-past eight o', 'Don  said a voice Miss La Creevy knew. ', 'I told the servant not to mention my name, because I wished to surprise you.', 'Mr. Nicholas! You have not forgotten me, I see,', 'You have not forgotten me, I see,', 'Why, I think I should even have known you if I had met you in the street, Hannah, another cup and saucer. Now, I ll trouble you not to repeat the impertinence you were guilty of, on the morning you went away.', 'You would not be very angry, would you?', 'Wouldn  said Miss La Creevy.  s all!', 'I never saw such a rude creature!', 'You told me to try,', 'Well; but I was speaking ironically,', 'Oh! that  said Nicholas; ', 'I dare say you didn  retorted Miss La Creevy. ', 'I need look somewhat changed, for I have undergone some suffering, both of mind and body, since I left London. I have been very poor, too, and have even suffered from want.', 'Good Heaven, Mr. Nicholas! what are you telling me?', 'Nothing which need distress you quite so much, neither did I come here to bewail my lot, but on matter more to the purpose. I wish to meet my uncle face to face. I should tell you that first.', 'Then all I have to say about that is, that I don', 'In the main, there may be no great difference of opinion between you and me, so far; but you will understand, that I desire to confront him, to justify myself, and to cast his duplicity and malice in his throat.', 'That  rejoined Miss La Creevy.  t cry my eyes quite out of my head, if they choked him. Well?', 'To this end, I called upon him this morning, He only returned to town on Saturday, and I knew nothing of his arrival until late last night.', 'And did you see him?', 'No, He had gone out.', 'Hah! on some kind, charitable business, I dare say.', 'I have reason to believe, from what has been told me, by a friend of mine who is acquainted with his movements, that he intends seeing my mother and sister today, and giving them his version of the occurrences that have befallen me. I will meet him there.', 'That  said Miss La Creevy, rubbing her hands.  t know, there is much to be thought of--others to be considered.', 'I have considered others, but as honesty and honour are both at issue, nothing shall deter me.', 'You should know best,', 'In this case I hope so, And all I want you to do for me, is, to prepare them for my coming. They think me a long way off, and if I went wholly unexpected, I should frighten them. If you can spare time to tell them that you have seen me, and that I shall be with them in a quarter of an hour afterwards, you will do me a great service.', 'I wish I could do you, or any of you, a greater, but the power to serve, is as seldom joined with the will, as the will is with the power, I think.', 'but the power to serve, is as seldom joined with the will, as the will is with the power, I think.', 'You are here already, are you, my gentleman? Then he shall announce himself, and see what effect that has on you.', 'Then he shall announce himself, and see what effect that has on you.', 'This is pretty, s note; ', 'I never will believe it, never. It is some base conspiracy, which carries its own falsehood with it.', 'My dear, you wrong the worthy man. These are not inventions. The man is assaulted, your brother is not to be found; this boy, of whom they speak, goes with him--remember, remember.', 'It is impossible, Nicholas!--and a thief too! Mama, how can you sit and hear such statements?', 'It would be my duty, if he came in my way, to deliver him up to justice, my bounden duty; I should have no other course, as a man of the world and a man of business, to pursue. And yet, and yet I would not. I would spare the feelings of his--of his sister. And his mother of course,', 'Everything, s sobs, ', 'A lie!', 'Dear Nicholas, Be calm, consider--', 'Consider, Kate! When I consider all, and think of what has passed, I need be made of iron to stand before him.', 'Or bronze, there is not hardihood enough in flesh and blood to face it out.', 'Oh dear, dear! that things should have come to such a pass as this!', 'Who speaks in a tone, as if I had done wrong, and brought disgrace on them?', 'Your mother, sir,', 'Whose ears have been poisoned by you, by you--who, under pretence of deserving the thanks she poured upon you, heaped every insult, wrong, and indignity upon my head. You, who sent me to a den where sordid cruelty, worthy of yourself, runs wanton, and youthful misery stalks precocious; where the lightness of childhood shrinks into the heaviness of age, and its every promise blights, and withers as it grows. I call Heaven to witness, that I have seen all this, and that he knows it.', 'that I have seen all this, and that he knows it.', 'Refute these calumnies, and be more patient, so that you may give them no advantage. Tell us what you really did, and show that they are untrue.', 'Of what do they--or of what does he--accuse me?', 'First, of attacking your master, and being within an ace of qualifying yourself to be tried for murder, I speak plainly, young man, bluster as you will.', 'I interfered, to save a miserable creature from the vilest cruelty. In so doing, I inflicted such punishment upon a wretch as he will not readily forget, though far less than he deserved from me. If the same scene were renewed before me now, I would take the same part; but I would strike harder and heavier, and brand him with such marks as he should carry to his grave, go to it when he would.', 'You hear? Penitence, this!', 'Oh dear me! I don t.', 'Do not speak just now, mama, I entreat you, Dear Nicholas, I only tell you, that you may know what wickedness can prompt, but they accuse you of--a ring is missing, and they dare to say that--', 'The woman, the wife of the fellow from whom these charges come, dropped--as I suppose--a worthless ring among some clothes of mine, early in the morning on which I left the house. At least, I know that she was in the bedroom where they lay, struggling with an unhappy child, and that I found it when I opened my bundle on the road. I returned it, at once, by coach, and they have it now.', 'I knew, I knew, About this boy, love, in whose company they say you left?', 'The boy, a silly, helpless creature, from brutality and hard usage, is with me now,', 'You hear? everything proved, even upon his own confession. Do you choose to restore that boy, sir?', 'No, I do not,', 'You do not?', 'No, not to the man with whom I found him. I would that I knew on whom he has the claim of birth: I might wring something from his sense of shame, if he were dead to every tie of nature.', 'Indeed! Now, sir, will you hear a word or two from me?', 'You can speak when and what you please, I take little heed of what you say or threaten.', 'Mighty well, sir, but perhaps it may concern others, who may think it worth their while to listen, and consider what I tell them. I will address your mother, sir, who knows the world.', 'Ah! and I only too dearly wish I didn', 'Of what I have done, or what I meant to do, for you, ma s scanty wages. I regret to leave you, and more to leave her, now, but I will not encourage this compound of meanness and cruelty, and, as I will not ask you to renounce him, I see you no more.', 'I can  cried Mrs. Nickleby.  t, you know, brother-in-law, I can s not possible; I couldn  Pouring forth these and a perfectly wonderful train of other disjointed expressions of regret, which no mortal power but Mrs. Nickleby', 'Why do you say "IF Nicholas has done what they say he has," mama? You know he has not.', 'I don  said Mrs Nickleby;  t let us talk any more about it. We can go to the Workhouse, or the Refuge for the Destitute, or the Magdalen Hospital, I dare say; and the sooner we go the better.', 'Stay, You need not leave this place, sir, for it will be relieved of my presence in one minute, and it will be long, very long, before I darken these doors again.', 'Nicholas, s shoulder,  s sake speak to him.', 'I never meant, Kate, I never meant to stay among you; think better of me than to suppose it possible. I may turn my back on this town a few hours sooner than I intended, but what of that? We shall not forget each other apart, and better days will come when we shall part no more. Be a woman, Kate, and do not make me one, while HE looks on.', 'No, no, I will not, but you will not leave us. Oh! think of all the happy days we have had together, before these terrible misfortunes came upon us; of all the comfort and happiness of home, and the trials we have to bear now; of our having no protector under all the slights and wrongs that poverty so much favours, and you cannot leave us to bear them alone, without one hand to help us.', 'You will be helped when I am away, I am no help to you, no protector; I should bring you nothing but sorrow, and want, and suffering. My own mother sees it, and her fondness and fears for you, point to the course that I should take. And so all good angels bless you, Kate, till I can carry you to some home of mine, where we may revive the happiness denied to us now, and talk of these trials as of things gone by. Do not keep me here, but let me go at once. There. Dear girl--dear girl.', 'I need not entreat your sympathy, for I know your nature. You will never forget them.', 'Whatever step you take, sir, I shall keep a strict account of. I leave them to you, at your desire. There will be a day of reckoning sooner or later, and it will be a heavy one for you if they are wronged.', 'Well, Smike, let me hear what new acquaintances you have made this morning, or what new wonder you have found out, in the compass of this street and the next one.', 'No, I must talk of something else today.', 'Of what you like,', 'Of this, I know you are unhappy, and have got into great trouble by bringing me away. I ought to have known that, and stopped behind--I would, indeed, if I had thought it then. You--you--are not rich; you have not enough for yourself, and I should not be here. You grow, you grow thinner every day; your cheek is paler, and your eye more sunk. Indeed I cannot bear to see you so, and think how I am burdening you. I tried to go away today, but the thought of your kind face drew me back. I could not leave you without a word.', 'The word which separates us, shall never be said by me, for you are my only comfort and stay. I would not lose you now, Smike, for all the world could give. The thought of you has upheld me through all I have endured today, and shall, through fifty times such trouble. Give me your hand. My heart is linked to yours. We will journey from this place together, before the week is out. What, if I am steeped in poverty? You lighten it, and we will be poor together.', 'Upon my word! I should have thought some people would have had spirit enough to stop away altogether, when they know what an incumbrance their presence is to right-minded persons. But it s a queer world!', 'Well, Miss Nickleby, child, are you quite well again?', 'A great deal better, thank you,', 'I wish I could say the same,', 'Are you ill? I am very sorry for that.', 'Not exactly ill, but worried, child--worried,', 'I am still more sorry to hear that, Bodily illness is more easy to bear than mental.', 'Ah! and it  said Madame, rubbing her nose with much irritability of manner. ', 'Is my life and soul there?', 'No,', 'How can it say so, when it is blooming in the front room like a little rose in a demnition flower-pot? May its poppet come in and talk?', 'Certainly not, you know I never allow you here. Go along!', 'Why will it vex itself, and twist its little face into bewitching nutcrackers?', 'Oh! I can', 'Not--eh, not bear ME! Fibs, fibs. It couldn s not a woman alive, that could tell me such a thing to my face--to my own face.', 'Such destructive extravagance,', 'All in its joy at having gained such a lovely creature, such a little Venus, such a demd, enchanting, bewitching, engrossing, captivating little Venus,', 'See what a situation you have placed me in!', 'No harm will come, no harm shall come, to its own darling, It is all over; there will be nothing the matter; money shall be got in; and if it don', 'Hush! Don', 'Don  said the proprietor of these appearances.  s the mantie-making consarn, an', 'I say; this here t it?', 'Yes, What did you want?', 'Wait a minnit, This is a unpleasant bisness. Vere', 'My what--did you say? governor', 'governor', 'Mister Muntlehiney, Wot', 'He is above stairs, I believe, Do you want him?', 'No, I don s made a favour on. You can jist give him that  s all.', 'Good plate this here, Tix,', 'Ah! and this here article warn', 'Oh! Is this the missis?', 'It is Madame Mantalini,', 'Then, this is a writ of execution, and if it ll go over the house at wunst, please, and take the inwentory.', 'What', 'Fifteen hundred and twenty-seven pound, four and ninepence ha', 'The halfpenny be demd,', 'By all means if you vish it, and the ninepence.', 'It don', 'Not a button,', 'Well, wot t sleep at home for three nights to come, along of being in possession here. Wot  continued Mr Scaley, as Madame Mantalini sobbed.  s here isn t that to be to her feelings!', 'My cup of happiness  said Mantalini, approaching his wife with a penitent air; ', 'Oh! don  replied his wife, sobbing.  s enough.', 'Miss Nickleby, make haste, for Heaven', 'Ah! interrupted! s dressing-gown pocket, while Mr. Mantalini', 'Alfred, I didn t mean to say it!', 'Ruined! Have I brought ruin upon the best and purest creature that ever blessed a demnition vagabond! Demmit, let me go.', 'Compose yourself, my own angel, It was nobody', 'And I say again, I say again, that a milliner s is the very last description of business, Kate, that you should have thought of attaching yourself to. I don', 'Well, well, mama, what would you recommend now?', 'Recommend! isn t have been that, either; but whatever her name was, don', 'And I say, that if your uncle don s well worth the trial.', 'that if your uncle don s well worth the trial.', 'Place chairs.', 'Leave the room, Alphonse.', 'I have ventured to call, ma  said Kate, after a few seconds of awkward silence, ', 'Yes, one of my people put it in the paper--Yes.', 'I thought, perhaps, that if you had not already made a final choice, you would forgive my troubling you with an application.', 'Yes,', 'If you have already made a selection--', 'Oh dear no, I am not so easily suited. I really don', 'Oh! I apprehend you.', 'I assure you, ma  said Mrs. Nickleby, ', 'Dear mama,', 'My dear Kate, if you will allow me to speak, I shall take the liberty of explaining to this lady--', 'I think it is almost unnecessary, mama.', 'What are your accomplishments?', 'You are a good temper?', 'I hope so,', 'And have a highly respectable reference for everything, have you?', 'Have the goodness to draw your chair a little nearer, and let me look at you, I am so very nearsighted that I can', 'I like your appearance, Alphonse, request your master to come here.', 'Alphonse, request your master to come here.', 'Oh! yes. This is a most important matter. Mrs Wititterly is of a very excitable nature; very delicate, very fragile; a hothouse plant, an exotic.', 'Oh! Henry, my dear,', 'You are, my love, you know you are; one breath-- Pho! you', 'Your soul is too large for your body, Your intellect wears you out; all the medical men say so; you know that there is not a physician who is not proud of being called in to you. What is their unanimous declaration? "My dear doctor," said I to Sir Tumley Snuffim, in this very room, the very last time he came. "My dear doctor, what is my wife  Here Mr. Wititterly, who, in the ardour of his description, had flourished his right hand to within something less than an inch of Mrs. Nickleby', ' Here Mr. Wititterly, who, in the ardour of his description, had flourished his right hand to within something less than an inch of Mrs. Nickleby', 'You make me out worse than I am, Henry,', 'I do not, Julia, I do not, The society in which you move--necessarily move, from your station, connection, and endowments--is one vortex and whirlpool of the most frightful excitement. Bless my heart and body, can I ever forget the night you danced with the baronet', 'I always suffer for these triumphs afterwards,', 'And for that very reason, you must have a companion, in whom there is great gentleness, great sweetness, excessive sympathy, and perfect repose.', 'Mrs. Wititterly, is sought after and courted by glittering crowds and brilliant circles. She is excited by the opera, the drama, the fine arts, the--the--the--', 'is sought after and courted by glittering crowds and brilliant circles. She is excited by the opera, the drama, the fine arts, the--the--the--', 'The nobility, my love,', 'The nobility, of course, And the military. She forms and expresses an immense variety of opinions on an immense variety of subjects. If some people in public life were acquainted with Mrs Wititterly', 'Hush, Henry, this is scarcely fair.', 'I mention no names, Julia, and nobody is injured. I merely mention the circumstance to show that you are no ordinary person, that there is a constant friction perpetually going on between your mind and your body; and that you must be soothed and tended. Now let me hear, dispassionately and calmly, what are this young lady', 'They are very distinguished people, evidently, s arm. ', 'Do you think so, mama?', 'Why, who can help thinking so, Kate, my love? She is pale though, and looks much exhausted. I hope she may not be wearing herself out, but I am very much afraid.', 'She is pale though, and looks much exhausted. I hope she may not be wearing herself out, but I am very much afraid.', 'It is better as it is, When I left them before, and could have said goodbye a thousand times if I had chosen, I spared them the pain of leave-taking, and why not now? God bless them!', 'Which way?', 'To Kingston first,', 'And where afterwards? Why won', 'Because I scarcely know myself, good friend, and if I did, I have neither plan nor prospect yet, and might shift my quarters a hundred times before you could possibly communicate with me.', 'I am afraid you have some deep scheme in your head,', 'So deep, that even I can', 'You won', 'I am not very likely to, I have not so many friends that I shall grow confused among the number, and forget my best one.', 'Now listen to me, Smike, We are bound for Portsmouth.', 'I don  resumed Nicholas; ', 'I hope so, When I was at that--you know where I mean?', 'Yes, I know, You needn', 'Well, when I was there, I could milk a cow, and groom a horse, with anybody.', 'Ha! I am afraid they don s a will, there', 'And I am very willing,', 'God knows you are, and if you fail, it shall go hard but I', 'Do we go all the way today?', 'That would be too severe a trial, even for your willing legs, No. Godalming is some thirty and odd miles from London--as I found from a map I borrowed--and I purpose to rest there. We must push on again tomorrow, for we are not rich enough to loiter. Let me relieve you of that bundle! Come!', 'No, no, Don', 'Why not?', 'Let me do something for you, at least, You will never let me serve you as I ought. You will never know how I think, day and night, of ways to please you.', 'You are a foolish fellow to say it, for I know it well, and see it, or I should be a blind and senseless beast, Let me ask you a question while I think of it, and there is no one by, Have you a good memory?', 'I don  said Smike, shaking his head sorrowfully.  s all gone now--all gone.', 'Why do you think you had once?', 'Because I could remember, when I was a child, but that is very, very long ago, or at least it seems so. I was always confused and giddy at that place you took me from; and could never remember, and sometimes couldn', 'You are wandering now,', 'No, I was only thinking how--', 'Think no more of that place, for it is all over, What of the first day you went to Yorkshire?', 'Eh!', 'That was before you began to lose your recollection, you know, Was the weather hot or cold?', 'Wet, Very wet. I have always said, when it has rained hard, that it was like the night I came: and they used to crowd round and laugh to see me cry when the rain fell heavily. It was like a child, they said, and that made me think of it more. I turned cold all over sometimes, for I could see myself as I was then, coming in at the very same door.', 'As you were then, how was that?', 'Such a little creature, that they might have had pity and mercy upon me, only to remember it.', 'You didn', 'No, oh no.', 'Who was with you?', 'A man--a dark, withered man. I have heard them say so, at the school, and I remembered that before. I was glad to leave him, I was afraid of him; but they made me more afraid of them, and used me harder too.', 'Look at me, There; don', 'There; don', 'No, no, never.', 'Nor any house but that house in Yorkshire?', 'No, a room--I remember I slept in a room, a large lonesome room at the top of a house, where there was a trap-door in the ceiling. I have covered my head with the clothes often, not to see it, for it frightened me: a young child with no one near at night: and I used to wonder what was on the other side. There was a clock too, an old clock, in one corner. I remember that. I have never forgotten that room; for when I have terrible dreams, it comes back, just as it was. I see things and people in it that I had never seen then, but there is the room just as it used to be; THAT never changes.', 'Will you let me take the bundle now?', 'No, no. Come, let us walk on.', 'Twelve miles,', 'Twelve long miles,', 'Is it a good road?', 'Very bad,', 'I want to get on, I scarcely know what to do.', 'Don  rejoined the landlord.  t go on if it was me.', 'Wouldn', 'Not if I knew when I was well off,', 'What can you give us for supper?', 'Why--what would you like?', 'Then, I must leave it entirely to you, as I would have done, at first, if you had allowed me.', 'Why, then I  rejoined the landlord.  s a gentleman in the parlour that s more of it than he can manage, and I have very little doubt that if I ask leave, you can sup with him. I', 'No, no, I would rather not. I--at least--pshaw! why cannot I speak out? Here; you see that I am travelling in a very humble manner, and have made my way hither on foot. It is more than probable, I think, that the gentleman may not relish my company; and although I am the dusty figure you see, I am too proud to thrust myself into his.', 'Lord love you, it t particular.', 'Is he not?', 'Not he, He ll soon see all about that. Just wait a minute.', 'All right, I knew he would. You', 'Mr. Vincent Crummles, This is the young gentleman.', 'This is the young gentleman.', 'There  said Mr. Crummles, motioning Nicholas not to advance and spoil it.  un has him; if the big  t knock under, in three seconds, he', 'That  said Mr. Crummles. ', 'You had better get your wind now and change your clothes.', 'What did you think of that, sir?', 'Very good, indeed--capital,', 'You won', 'Match!', 'I mean if they were a little more of a size,', 'Size! why, it t a little man contending against a big one?--unless there t hands enough for that business in our company.', 'I see, I beg your pardon. That didn', 'It  said Mr. Crummles.  re going there, look into the theatre, and see how that', 'You are going that way?', 'Ye-yes, Yes, I am.', 'Do you know the town at all?', 'No,', 'Never there?', 'Never.', 'Excuse my saying so, but what a capital countenance your friend has got!', 'Poor fellow! I wish it were a little more plump, and less haggard.', 'Plump! you', 'Do you think so?', 'Think so, sir! Why, as he is now, without a pad upon his body, and hardly a touch of paint upon his face, he d be certain of three rounds the moment he put his head out of the practicable door in the front grooves O.P.', 'You view him with a professional eye,', 'And well I may, I never saw a young fellow so regularly cut out for that line, since I', 'Let them go, and we', 'Why, so I saw, You s the matter?', 'And what', 'Getting something to do which will keep me and my poor fellow-traveller in the common necessaries of life, That', 'What', 'There are many vessels leaving the port, I suppose, I shall try for a berth in some ship or other. There is meat and drink there at all events.', 'I shall try for a berth in some ship or other. There is meat and drink there at all events.', 'Salt meat and new rum; pease-pudding and chaff-biscuits,', 'One may do worse than that, I can rough it, I believe, as well as most young men of my age and previous habits.', 'You need be able to, if you go on board ship; but you won', 'Why not?', 'Because there  replied the manager; ', 'What do you mean? Men are not born able seamen. They must be reared, I suppose?', 'Does no other profession occur to you, which a young man of your figure and address could take up easily, and see the world to advantage in?', 'No,', 'Why, then, I  said Mr. Crummles, throwing his pipe into the fire, and raising his voice. ', 'The stage!', 'The theatrical profession, I am in the theatrical profession myself, my wife is in the theatrical profession, my children are in the theatrical profession. I had a dog that lived and died in it from a puppy; and my chaise-pony goes on, in Timour the Tartar. I', 'I don  rejoined Nicholas, whose breath had been almost taken away by this sudden proposal. ', 'There  said Mr. Vincent Crummles.  ll do as well as if you had thought of nothing else but the lamps, from your birth downwards.', 'You can be useful to us in a hundred ways, Think what capital bills a man of your education could write for the shop-windows.', 'Think what capital bills a man of your education could write for the shop-windows.', 'Well, I think I could manage that department,', 'To be sure you could, "For further particulars see small hand-bills"--we might have half a volume in every one of ', 'em. Pieces too; why, you could write us a piece to bring out the whole strength of the company, whenever we wanted one.', 'I am not quite so confident about that, But I dare say I could scribble something now and then, that would suit you.', 'We  said the manager. ', 'Into the piece?', 'Yes, I bought  ll come in admirably. That em. Most of the theatres keep an author on purpose.', 'Indeed!', 'Oh, yes, a common thing. It t happen to be anything of an artist, do you?', 'That is not one of my accomplishments,', 'Ah! Then it can  said the manager.  re not, it can', 'What should I get for all this?  reflection. ', 'Live by it! Like a prince! With your own salary, and your friend d make--ah! you', 'You don', 'I do indeed, and if we had a run of good houses, nearly double the money.', 'He', 'Many and many is the circuit this pony has gone,  sake. ', 'Was she?', 'She ate apple-pie at a circus for upwards of fourteen years, fired pistols, and went to bed in a nightcap; and, in short, took the low comedy entirely. His father was a dancer.', 'Was he at all distinguished?', 'Not very, He was rather a low sort of pony. The fact is, he had been originally jobbed out by the day, and he never quite got over his old habits. He was clever in melodrama too, but too broad--too broad. When the mother died, he took the port-wine business.', 'The port-wine business!', 'Drinking port-wine with the clown, but he was greedy, and one night bit off the bowl of the glass, and choked himself, so his vulgarity was the death of him at last.', 'We  said the manager, ', 'Here we are,', 'Is this a theatre? I thought it was a blaze of light and finery.', 'Why, so it is, but not by day, Smike--not by day.', 'Mr. Johnson, let me introduce Mrs. Vincent Crummles.', 'I am glad to see you, sir, I am very glad to see you, and still more happy to hail you as a promising member of our corps.', 'And this, and this is the other. You too, are welcome, sir.', 'He', 'He is admirable, An acquisition indeed.', 'They are going through the Indian Savage and the Maiden,', 'Oh! the little ballet interlude. Very good, go on. A little this way, if you please, Mr. Johnson. That', 'Very well indeed, bravo!', 'Bravo! Beautiful!', 'Beautiful!', 'This, sir, this is the infant phenomenon--Miss Ninetta Crummles.', 'this is the infant phenomenon--Miss Ninetta Crummles.', 'Your daughter?', 'My daughter--my daughter, the idol of every place we go into, sir. We have had complimentary letters about this girl, sir, from the nobility and gentry of almost every town in England.', 'I am not surprised at that, she must be quite a natural genius.', 'Quite a--! I  he said; ', 'the talent of this child is not to be imagined. She must be seen, sir--seen--to be ever so faintly appreciated. There; go to your mother, my dear.', 'May I ask how old she is?', 'You may, sir, s face, as some men do when they have doubts about being implicitly believed in what they are going to say. ', 'Not more!', 'Not a day.', 'Dear me! it', 'Talent there, sir!', 'Ah! she oughtn t.', 'What do you mean?', 'I mean to say, that she is too good for country boards, and that she ought to be in one of the large houses in London, or nowhere; and I tell you more, without mincing the matter, that if it wasn ll introduce me here, Mr. Crummles.', 'Mr. Folair,', 'Happy to know you, sir. A recruit, sir, I understand?', 'An unworthy one,', 'Did you ever see such a set-out as that?', 'As what?', 'You don', 'Infant humbug, sir, There isn t do better than that. She may thank her stars she was born a manager', 'You seem to take it to heart,', 'Yes, by Jove, and well I may, Isn s throats, while other people are passed over? Isn s confounded family conceit blinding him, even to his own interest? Why I KNOW of fifteen and sixpence that came to Southampton one night last month, to see me dance the Highland Fling; and what ve never been put up in it since--never once--while the "infant phenomenon" has been grinning through artificial flowers at five people and a baby in the pit, and two boys in the gallery, every night.', 'If I may judge from what I have seen of you, you must be a valuable member of the company.', 'Oh! I CAN come it pretty well--nobody better, perhaps, in my own line--but having such business as one gets here, is like putting lead on one', 'Well, Tommy, what', 'A new appearance, that', 'Do the honours, Tommy, do the honours,', 'This is Mr. Lenville, who does our first tragedy, Mr. Johnson,', 'Except when old bricks and mortar takes it into his head to do it himself, you should add, Tommy, You know who bricks and mortar is, I suppose, sir?', 'I do not, indeed,', 'We call Crummles that, because his style of acting is rather in the heavy and ponderous way, I mustn ve got a part of twelve lengths here, which I must be up in tomorrow night, and I haven m a confounded quick study, that', 'I beg your pardon, but did you ever play at Canterbury?', 'but did you ever play at Canterbury?', 'I never did,', 'I recollect meeting a gentleman at Canterbury, only for a few moments, for I was leaving the company as he joined it, so like you that I felt almost certain it was the same.', 'only for a few moments, for I was leaving the company as he joined it, so like you that I felt almost certain it was the same.', 'I see you now for the first time, I am sure I never saw you before; I couldn', 'Oh, I s very flattering of you to say so, Now I look at you again, I see that the gentleman at Canterbury hadn ll think me very foolish for taking notice of such things, won', 'Not at all, How can I feel otherwise than flattered by your notice in any way?', 'Oh! you men are such vain creatures!', 'Led, my dear,', 'Well, what is the matter?', 'It', 'Not the same what?', 'Canterbury--you know what I mean. Come here! I want to speak to you.', 'Ladies and gentlemen, we re all up in, so we shall only want one rehearsal. Everybody at ten, if you please.', 'Everybody at ten,', 'On Monday morning we shall read a new piece, the name', 'Hallo! I--', 'On Monday morning, s remonstrance;  ll do, ladies and gentlemen.', 'Upon my word, I don', 'Pooh, pooh,', 'But really I can  returned Nicholas; ', 'Invention! what the devil', 'Everything, my dear sir.', 'Nothing, my dear sir, Do you understand French?', 'Do you understand French?', 'Perfectly well.', 'Very good, There! Just turn that into English, and put your name on the title-page. Damn me, if I haven t have a man or woman in my company that wasn', 'What are you going to do about your lodgings?', 'Come home with me then, and my boys shall go with you after dinner, and show you the most likely place.', 'You are welcome,', 'We have but a shoulder of mutton with onion sauce, but such as our dinner is, we beg you to partake of it.', 'You are very good, I shall do it ample justice.', 'Vincent, what is the hour?', 'Five minutes past dinner-time,', 'Are they very theatrical people here?', 'No, far from it--far from it.', 'I pity them,', 'So do I, if they have no relish for theatrical entertainments, properly conducted.', 'Then they have none, sir, To the infant', 'Is it possible?', 'And two pound of that was trust, pa,', 'And two pound of that was trust, Mrs. Crummles herself has played to mere handfuls.', 'But they are always a taking audience, Vincent,', 'Most audiences are, when they have good acting--real good acting--the regular thing,', 'Do you give lessons, ma', 'I do,', 'There is no teaching here, I suppose?', 'There has been, I have received pupils here. I imparted tuition to the daughter of a dealer in ships', 'Let me see, Would you like some nice little part with the infant?', 'You are very good, but I think perhaps it would be better if I had somebody of my own size at first, in case I should turn out awkward. I should feel more at home, perhaps.', 'True, Perhaps you would. And you could play up to the infant, in time, you know.', 'Certainly,', 'Then I ll do, You shall study Romeo when you t forget to throw the pump and tubs in by-the-bye--Juliet Miss Snevellicci, old Grudden the nurse.--Yes, that', 'There! Lay down our personal property, Smike, We have fallen upon strange times, and Heaven only knows the end of them; but I am tired with the events of these three days, and will postpone reflection till tomorrow--if I can.', 'House, house, house!', 'What, ho! within there,', 'Confound these fellows! they have come to breakfast, I suppose. I ll wait an instant.', 'Here, come in, In the name of all that t make that noise outside.', 'An uncommon snug little box this, Pernicious snug.', 'Pernicious snug.', 'For a man at all particular in such matters, it might be a trifle too snug, for, although it is, undoubtedly, a great convenience to be able to reach anything you want from the ceiling or the floor, or either side of the room, without having to move from your chair, still these advantages can only be had in an apartment of the most limited size.', 'It isn  returned Mr. Lenville.  ll have some good part in this piece of yours?', 'That reminds me,--my wife, Mr. Johnson,--I hope she', 'I glanced at the French copy last night, It looks very good, I think.', 'What do you mean to do for me, old fellow? Anything in the gruff and grumble way?', 'You turn your wife and child out of doors, and, in a fit of rage and jealousy, stab your eldest son in the library.', 'Do I though! That', 'After which, you are troubled with remorse till the last act, and then you make up your mind to destroy yourself. But, just as you are raising the pistol to your head, a clock strikes--ten.', 'I see, Very good.', 'You pause, you recollect to have heard a clock strike ten in your infancy. The pistol falls from your hand--you are overcome--you burst into tears, and become a virtuous and exemplary character for ever afterwards.', 'Capital! that ll be a triumphant success.', 'Is there anything good for me?', 'Let me see, You play the faithful and attached servant; you are turned out of doors with the wife and child.', 'Always coupled with that infernal phenomenon, and we go into poor lodgings, where I won', 'and we go into poor lodgings, where I won', 'Why--yes, that is the course of the piece.', 'I must have a dance of some kind, you know, You d better make a PAS DE DEUX, and save time.', 'There', 'Upon my word I don s to be done,', 'Why, isn  reasoned Mr. Lenville.  t you?--Well, look here. The distressed lady sinks into a chair, and buries her face in her pocket-handkerchief. "What makes you weep, mama?" says the child. "Don ll make me weep too!"--"And me!" says the favourite servant, rubbing his eyes with his arm. "What can we do to raise your spirits, dear mama?" says the little child. "Ay, what CAN we do?" says the faithful servant. "Oh, Pierre!" says the distressed lady; "would that I could shake off these painful thoughts."--"Try, ma am; be amused."--"I will," says the lady, "I will learn to suffer with fortitude. Do you remember that dance, my honest friend, which, in happier days, you practised with this sweet angel? It never failed to calm my spirits then. Oh! let me see it once again before I die!"--There it is--cue for the band, BEFORE I DIE,--and off they go. That t it, Tommy?', 'am, try," says the faithful servant; "rouse yourself, ma s the regular thing; isn', 'That  replied Mr. Folair. ', 'Been in front tonight?', 'No, not yet. I am going to see the play.', 'We  said Mr. Crummles. ', 'Oh, indeed! a family, I suppose?', 'Yes, yes. It', 'Six, pa and ma eight, aunt nine, governess ten, grandfather and grandmother twelve. Then, there s cheap at a guinea; they gain by taking a box.', 'I wonder you allow so many,', 'There  replied Mr. Crummles;  s always expected in the country. If there are six children, six people come to hold them in their laps. A family-box carries double always. Ring in the orchestra, Grudden!', 'What did you think of that?', 'I think it was very capital indeed, Miss Snevellicci in particular was uncommonly good.', 'She  said Mr. Crummles;  ve been thinking of bringing out that piece of yours on her bespeak night.', 'When?', 'The night of her bespeak. Her benefit night, when her friends and patrons bespeak the play,', 'Oh! I understand,', 'You see, it', 'Yours, you mean,', 'I said mine, didn  returned Mr. Crummles.  ll have done it, and are sure to be up in the lover', 'I don  replied Nicholas; ', 'Very good, then we s a little--what shall I call it?--a little canvassing takes place on these occasions.', 'Among the patrons, I suppose?', 'Among the patrons; and the fact is, that Snevellicci has had so many bespeaks in this place, that she wants an attraction. She had a bespeak when her mother-in-law died, and a bespeak when her uncle died; and Mrs. Crummles and myself have had bespeaks on the anniversary of the phenomenon s some difficulty in getting a good one. Now, won', 'How do you mean?', 'Don', 'Oh dear me, I shouldn', 'The infant will accompany her, The moment it was suggested to me, I gave permission for the infant to go. There will not be the smallest impropriety--Miss Snevellicci, sir, is the very soul of honour. It would be of material service--the gentleman from London--author of the new piece--actor in the new piece--first appearance on any boards--it would lead to a great bespeak, Mr. Johnson.', 'I am very sorry to throw a damp upon the prospects of anybody, and more especially a lady, but really I must decidedly object to making one of the canvassing party.', 'What does Mr. Johnson say, Vincent?', 'He has some objection, my dear,', 'Objection! Can it be possible?', 'Oh, I hope not! You surely are not so cruel--oh, dear me!--Well, I--to think of that now, after all one', 'Mr. Johnson will not persist, my dear, Think better of him than to suppose it. Gallantry, humanity, all the best feelings of his nature, must be enlisted in this interesting cause.', 'Which moves even a manager,', 'And a manager  added Mrs. Crummles, in her accustomed tragedy tones. ', 'It is not in my nature, to resist any entreaty, unless it is to do something positively wrong; and, beyond a feeling of pride, I know nothing which should prevent my doing this. I know nobody here, and nobody knows me. So be it then. I yield.', 'Miss Snevellicci lives here, I believe?', 'Will you have the goodness to let her know that Mr. Johnson is here?', 'Oh, if you please, you  replied the tailor', 'You  said the tailor She won', 'But really, my darling Led, who lives with me here, was taken so very ill in the night that I thought she would have expired in my arms.', 'Such a fate is almost to be envied, but I am very sorry to hear it nevertheless.', 'What a creature you are to flatter!', 'If it be flattery to admire your charms and accomplishments, you have better specimens of it here.', 'Oh you cruel creature, to read such things as those! I  said Miss Snevellicci, seizing the book and putting it away in a closet. ', 'I thought you had kindly left it here, on purpose for me to read,', 'I wouldn  rejoined Miss Snevellicci.  s no trusting her.', 'Well, Miss Snevellicci, and how do YOU do?', 'I venture to call, for the purpose of asking whether you would put your name to my bespeak, ma', 'Oh! I really don  replied Mrs. Curdle.  s not as if the theatre was in its high and palmy days--you needn', 'As an exquisite embodiment of the poet', 'What man is there, now living, who can present before us all those changing and prismatic colours with which the character of Hamlet is invested?', 'What man indeed--upon the stage, Hamlet! Pooh! ridiculous! Hamlet is gone, perfectly gone.', 'Quite a new one, of which this gentleman is the author, and in which he plays; being his first appearance on any stage. Mr. Johnson is the gentleman', 'I hope you have preserved the unities, sir?', 'The original piece is a French one, There is abundance of incident, sprightly dialogue, strongly-marked characters--', '--All unavailing without a strict observance of the unities, sir, The unities of the drama, before everything.', 'Might I ask you, might I ask you what the unities are?', 'a unity of feeling, a breadth, a light and shade, a warmth of colouring, a tone, a harmony, a glow, an artistical development of original conceptions, which I look for, in vain, among older performers--I don', 'Perfectly,', 'Just so, That is my definition of the unities of the drama.', 'I don t know, If we do, it must be distinctly understood that we do not pledge ourselves to the quality of the performances. Let it go forth to the world, that we do not give THEM the sanction of our names, but that we confer the distinction merely upon Miss Snevellicci. That being clearly stated, I take it to be, as it were, a duty, that we should extend our patronage to a degraded stage, even for the sake of the associations with which it is entwined. Have you got two-and-sixpence for half-a-crown, Miss Snevellicci?', 'Let me see, twice four', 'Odd people those,', 'I assure you, that I think myself very lucky they did not owe all the money instead of being sixpence short. Now, if you were to succeed, they would give people to understand that they had always patronised you; and if you were to fail, they would have been quite certain of that from the very beginning.', 'I shall certainly persuade Mr. Borum to take a private box, I shall only take two of the children, and will make up the rest of the party, of gentlemen--your admirers, Miss Snevellicci. Augustus, you naughty boy, leave the little girl alone.', 'I am sure you must be very tired, I cannot think of allowing you to go, without first taking a glass of wine. Fie, Charlotte, I am ashamed of you! Miss Lane, my dear, pray see to the children.', 'I am sure, where you ever learnt to act as you do, I cannot understand (Emma, don', 'I am very happy to hear you express so favourable an opinion, It', 'Like it! Who can help liking it? I would go to the play, twice a week if I could: I dote upon it--only you', 'I', 'What  rejoined Nicholas. ', 'No, no, we never come to the pony till everything else has failed, I don', 'A boy phenomenon, perhaps?', 'There is only one phenomenon, sir, and that', 'and that', 'Very true, I beg your pardon. Then I don', 'What should you say to a young lady from London? Miss So-and-so, of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane?', 'Miss So-and-so, of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane?', 'I should say she would look very well in the bills,', 'You  said Mr. Crummles;  t have been far out. Look here; what do you think of this?', 'Dear me! I know that lady.', 'Then you are acquainted with as much talent as was ever compressed into one young person  retorted Mr. Crummles, rolling up the bills again;   added Mr. Crummles with a prophetic sigh,  s the only sylph I ever saw, who could stand upon one leg, and play the tambourine on her other knee, LIKE a sylph.', 'When does she come down?', 'We expect her today, She is an old friend of Mrs Crummles', 'Was she, indeed?', 'Yes. She was obliged to give it up though.', 'Did it disagree with her?', 'Not so much with her, as with her audiences, Nobody could stand it. It was too tremendous. You don', 'Nobody could stand it. It was too tremendous. You don', 'No, no, you don  said Mr. Crummles;  t, indeed. I don s a fact. I don em alive, and all upon the stage!', 'Extraordinary!', 'Ah! extraordinary indeed, I pledge you my professional word I didn  said Mr. Crummles, drawing a little nearer, and speaking in the tone of confidential friendship, ', 'You astonish me!', 'SHE astonished ME! Such grace, coupled with such dignity! I adored her from that moment!', 'Is it--?', 'Oh, yes, it  replied Mrs. Crummles, anticipating the question. ', 'It', 'Well, if he does, you must tell him to come up; that  replied Nicholas. ', 'It is not anybody who has been here before, for he is tumbling up every stair. Come in, come in. In the name of wonder! Mr Lillyvick?', 'Why, when did you come here?', 'This morning, sir,', 'Oh! I see; then you were at the theatre tonight, and it was your umb--', 'This umbrella, What did you think of that performance?', 'So far as I could judge, being on the stage, I thought it very agreeable.', 'Agreeable! I mean to say, sir, that it was delicious.', 'I say, delicious, Absorbing, fairy-like, toomultuous,', 'Ah! Yes--she is a clever girl.', 'She is a divinity, s double knock on the ground with the umbrella before-mentioned. ', 'Let me speak a word with you in private,', 'A bachelor is a miserable wretch, sir,', 'Is he?', 'He is, I have lived in the world for nigh sixty year, and I ought to know what it is.', 'You OUGHT to know, certainly, but whether you do or not, is another question.', 'If a bachelor happens to have saved a little matter of money, his sisters and brothers, and nephews and nieces, look TO that money, and not to him; even if, by being a public character, he is the head of the family, or, as it may be, the main from which all the other little branches are turned on, they still wish him dead all the while, and get low-spirited every time they see him looking in good health, because they want to come into his little property. You see that?', 'Oh yes, it', 'The great reason for not being married, is the expense; that s kept me off, or else--Lord! I might have had fifty women.', 'Fine women?', 'Fine women, sir! ay! not so fine as Henrietta Petowker, for she is an uncommon specimen, but such women as don s way, I can tell you. Now suppose a man can get a fortune IN a wife instead of with her--eh?', 'Why, then, he', 'That  retorted the collector, patting him benignantly on the side of the head with his umbrella; ', 'To make her Mrs. Lillyvick?', 'No, sir, not to make her Mrs. Lillyvick, Actresses, sir, always keep their maiden names--that m going to marry her; and the day after tomorrow, too.', 'Actresses, sir, always keep their maiden names--that m going to marry her; and the day after tomorrow, too.', 'I congratulate you, sir,', 'Thank you, sir, I shall draw her salary, of course, and I hope after all that it s a consolation.', 'Surely you don', 'No, no--of course not.', 'But how come you both here, if you', 'Why, that  replied the collector of water-rate. ', 'Family! What family?', 'The Kenwigses of course, If my niece and the children had known a word about it before I came away, they em till I took an oath not to marry anybody--or they', 'To be sure, Yes; they would have been jealous, no doubt.', 'To prevent which, Henrietta Petowker (it was settled between us) should come down here to her friends, the Crummleses, under pretence of this engagement, and I should go down to Guildford the day before, and join her on the coach there, which I did, and we came down from Guildford yesterday together. Now, for fear you should be writing to Mr. Noggs, and might say anything about us, we have thought it best to let you into the secret. We shall be married from the Crummleses t be expensive, you know, just muffins and coffee, with perhaps a shrimp or something of that sort for a relish, you know.', 'Yes, yes, I understand, Oh, I shall be most happy to come; it will give me the greatest pleasure. Where', 'Why, no, they couldn', 'Miss Snevellicci, I suppose?', 'Yes, that', 'And they', 'Why, they WILL have four bridesmaids; I ll make it rather theatrical.', 'Oh no, not at all, Who may the four be? Miss Snevellicci of course--Miss Ledrook--', 'The--the phenomenon,', 'Ha, ha! I beg your pardon, I don m laughing at--yes, that', 'Some young woman or other, some other friend of Henrietta Petowker ll be careful not to say anything about it, will you?', 'You may safely depend upon me, Won', 'No, I haven', 'I have not the least doubt of it,', 'Yes, certainly. Oh yes. No doubt. Good night.', 'I never will believe it, I cannot really. It', 'I might feel it was a great blow, to break up old associations and what-do-you-callems of that kind, but I would submit, my dear, I would indeed.', 'So would I, I would rather court the yoke than shun it. I have broken hearts before now, and I s a terrible thing to reflect upon.', 'It is indeed, Now Led, my dear, we must positively get her ready, or we shall be too late, we shall indeed.', 'How do you feel now, my love?', 'Oh Lillyvick! If you knew what I am undergoing for you!', 'Of course he knows it, love, and will never forget it,', 'Do you think he won  cried Miss Petowker, really showing great capability for the stage.  t? Do you think Lillyvick will always remember it--always, always, always?', 'Henrietta Petowker! cheer up, my lovely one.', 'Is the sight of me so dreadful, Henrietta Petowker?', 'Oh no, no, no, but all the friends--the darling friends--of my youthful days--to leave them all--it is such a shock!', 'Now then, Breakfast, breakfast.', 'It t it?', 'What is soon done, sir?', 'The tying up--the fixing oneself with a wife, It don', 'No, sir, It does not take long. And what then, sir?', 'Oh! nothing, It don', 'To hang himself!', 'To hang himself! Is any parallel attempted to be drawn in this company between matrimony and hanging?', 'The noose, you know,', 'The noose, sir? Does any man dare to speak to me of a noose, and Henrietta Pe--', 'Lillyvick,', '--And Henrietta Lillyvick in the same breath? In this house, in the presence of Mr. and Mrs. Crummles, who have brought up a talented and virtuous family, to be blessings and phenomenons, and what not, are we to hear talk of nooses?', 'Folair, I', 'What are you going on in this way at me for? What have I done?', 'Done, sir! aimed a blow at the whole framework of society--', 'And the best and tenderest feelings,', 'And the highest and most estimable of social ties, Noose! As if one was caught, trapped into the married state, pinned by the leg, instead of going into it of one', 'Noose! As if one was caught, trapped into the married state, pinned by the leg, instead of going into it of one', 'I didn  replied the actor.  m sorry for it; I can', 'So you ought to be, sir, and I am glad to hear that you have enough of feeling left to be so.', 'I don s to be done, Smike, I am afraid you can', 'I am afraid not, I think if you--but that would give you so much trouble.', 'What? Never mind me.', 'I think, if you were to keep saying it to me in little bits, over and over again, I should be able to recollect it from hearing you.', 'Do you think so? Well said. Let us see who tires first. Not I, Smike, trust me. Now then. Who calls so loud?', '"Who calls so loud?"', '"Who calls so loud?"', '"Who calls so loud?"', 'Hallo!', 'Are we going to lie here all da-a-y?', 'I don re fit for anything else, yet awhile, at least. I haven', 'yet awhile, at least. I haven', 'Life! I feel as if there would be nothing so snug and comfortable as to die at once.', 'Then why don', 'What the devil', 'Suppose, suppose we go back to the subject of little Nickleby, eh?', 'Which little Nickleby; the money-lender or the ga-a-l?', 'You take me, I see, The girl, of course.', 'You promised me you', 'So I did, but I have thought further of the matter since then. You distrust me in the business--you shall find her out yourself.', 'Na-ay,', 'But I say yes, You shall find her out yourself. Don ll put you in the way.', 'Now, curse me, if you ain', 'I  said Sir Mulberry. ', 'No! What the dey--', 'As a bait for you, old Nickleby told me so himself.', 'What a fine old cock it is! a noble rascal!', 'Yes, he knew she was a smart little creature--', 'Smart! Upon my soul, Hawk, she', 'Well, that t agree with yours, so much the better.', 'Confound it! you were thick enough with her that day, anyhow. I could hardly get in a word.', 'Well enough for once, well enough for once, but not worth the trouble of being agreeable to again. If you seriously want to follow up the niece, tell the uncle that you must know where she lives and how she lives, and with whom, or you are no longer a customer of his. He', 'Why didn  asked Lord Verisopht, ', 'I didn  answered Sir Mulberry carelessly;  t believe you were so very much in earnest.', 'Alone, eh? Oh, very good. I t keep me long, that', 'Now, my lord, what is it?', 'Nickleby, s ear, ', 'Is she, my lord? Maybe--maybe--I don', 'You know she  said the client.  t deny that.', 'Yes, I believe she is considered so, Indeed, I know she is. If I did not, you are an authority on such points, and your taste, my lord--on all points, indeed--is undeniable.', 'Well, p re a little right, and p re a little wrong--a little of both, Nickleby. I want to know where this beauty lives, that I may have another peep at her, Nickleby.', 'Really--', 'Don  cried the other, achieving the great point of his lesson to a miracle.  t want Hawk to hear.', 'You know he is your rival, do you?', 'He always is, d-a-amn him, and I want to steal a march upon him. Ha, ha, ha! He s all? Only tell me where she lives, Nickleby.', 'He bites, He bites.', 'Eh, Nickleby, eh? Where does she live?', 'Really, my lord, I must think before I tell you.', 'I must think before I tell you.', 'No, not a bit of it, Nickleby; you mustn  replied Verisopht. ', 'No good can come of your knowing, She has been virtuously and well brought up; to be sure she is handsome, poor, unprotected! Poor girl, poor girl.', 'I tell you I only want to see her, A ma-an may look at a pretty woman without harm, mayn re making a fortune out of me, Nickleby, and upon my soul nobody shall ever take me to anybody else, if you only tell me this.', 'As you promise that, my lord, and as I am most anxious to oblige you, and as there ll tell you. But you had better keep it to yourself, my lord; strictly to yourself.', 'and as I am most anxious to oblige you, and as there ll tell you. But you had better keep it to yourself, my lord; strictly to yourself.', 'Your object being only to see her again, you could effect it at any time you chose by that means.', 'I thought you had gone to sleep,', 'Sorry to detain you, but Nickleby has been so ama-azingly funny that I couldn', 'No, no, it was all his lordship. You know what a witty, humorous, elegant, accomplished man Lord Frederick is. Mind the step, my lord--Sir Mulberry, pray give way.', 'Mrs. Nickleby!', 'Nobody YOU know, Step into the office, my--my--dear. I', 'Nobody I know! Is this Mrs. Nickleby--the mother of Miss Nickleby--the delightful creature that I had the happiness of meeting in this house the very last time I dined here? But no; No, it can', 'I think you can tell the gentleman, brother-in-law, if it concerns him to know, that Kate Nickleby is my daughter.', 'Her daughter, my lord! This lady', 'This lady', 'My lord! Well, I never did--', 'This, then, my lord, is the lady to whose obliging marriage we owe so much happiness. This lady is the mother of sweet Miss Nickleby. Do you observe the extraordinary likeness, my lord? Nickleby--introduce us.', 'Upon my soul, it  said Lord Frederick, pressing forward. ', 'A--and how is Miss Nickleby? Well, I hope?', 'She is quite well, I  returned Mrs. Nickleby, recovering.  t well for some days after that day she dined here, and I can s almost better to walk at any time, for although I believe a hackney coachman can be transported for life, if he has a broken window, still they are so reckless, that they nearly all have broken windows. I once had a swelled face for six weeks, my lord, from riding in a hackney coach--I think it was a hackney coach, though I t a chariot; at all events I know it was a dark green, with a very long number, beginning with a nought and ending with a nine--no, beginning with a nine, and ending with a nought, that was it, and of course the stamp-office people would know at once whether it was a coach or a chariot if any inquiries were made there--however that was, there it was with a broken window and there was I for six weeks with a swelled face--I think that was the very same hackney coach, that we found out afterwards, had the top open all the time, and we should never even have known it, if they hadn t understand the subject, but I should say the Corn Laws could be nothing to THAT act of Parliament.', 'Indeed, I don s the fact.', 'Is that letter for me?', 'For you, brother-in-law, and I walked all the way up here on purpose to give it you.', 'All the way up here! What a confounded distance! How far do you call it now?', 'How far do I call it? Let me see. It', 'No, no. Not so much as that,', 'Oh! It is indeed, I appeal to his lordship.', 'I should decidedly say it was a mile,', 'It must be; it can  said Mrs. Nickleby.  s Wharf. Oh! It', 'Yes, on second thoughts I should say it was, But you don', 'But you don', 'Oh, no, I shall go back in an omnibus. I didn', 'Yes, yes, and you had better get back before dark.', 'Thank you, brother-in-law, so I had, I think I had better say goodbye, at once.', 'Not stop and--rest?', 'Oh dear me no,', 'Lord Frederick, we are going Mrs. Nickleby ll see her safe to the omnibus?', 'By all means. Ye-es.', 'Oh! I really couldn', 'What a delight, what a comfort, what a happiness, this amiable creature must be to you,', 'She is indeed, sir, she is the sweetest-tempered, kindest-hearted creature--and so clever!', 'She looks clayver,', 'I assure you she is, my lord, When she was at school in Devonshire, she was universally allowed to be beyond all exception the very cleverest girl there, and there were a great many very clever ones too, and that  said Mrs Nickleby,   added Mrs. Nickleby,  t know the handwriting of hers again; but anyway, I know it was a circular which they all copied, and of course it was a very gratifying thing--very gratifying.', 'I wish, I had never done this. And yet it will keep this boy to me, while there is money to be made. Selling a girl--throwing her in the way of temptation, and insult, and coarse speech. Nearly two thousand pounds profit from him already though. Pshaw! match-making mothers do the same thing every day.', 'If I had not put them in the right track today, this foolish woman would have done so. Well. If her daughter is as true to herself as she should be from what I have seen, what harm ensues? A little teasing, a little humbling, a few tears. Yes, She must take her chance. She must take her chance.', 'Bless my heart! if it should be--dear me, standing in the passage all this time--why don', 'How do you DO?', 'HOW do you do?', 'To know us, The loss has been ours, Mrs Nickleby. Has the loss been ours, Pyke?', 'It has, Pluck,', 'We have regretted it very often, I believe, Pyke?', 'Very often, Pluck,', 'But now, now we have the happiness we have pined and languished for. Have we pined and languished for this happiness, Pyke, or have we not?', 'You know we have, Pluck,', 'You hear him, ma  said Mr. Pluck, looking round; ', 'Whether I shall introduce myself with the same formality, whether I shall say myself that my name is Pluck, or whether I shall ask my friend Pyke (who being now regularly introduced, is competent to the office) to state for me, Mrs. Nickleby, that my name is Pluck; whether I shall claim your acquaintance on the plain ground of the strong interest I take in your welfare, or whether I shall make myself known to you as the friend of Sir Mulberry Hawk--these, Mrs Nickleby, are considerations which I leave to you to determine.', 'Any friend of Sir Mulberry Hawk', 'It is delightful to hear you say so, It is refreshing to know that you hold my excellent friend, Sir Mulberry, in such high esteem. A word in your ear, Mrs. Nickleby. When Sir Mulberry knows it, he will be a happy man--I say, Mrs. Nickleby, a happy man. Pyke, be seated.', 'MY good opinion, my good opinion can be of very little consequence to a gentleman like Sir Mulberry.', 'Of little consequence! Pyke, of what consequence to our friend, Sir Mulberry, is the good opinion of Mrs. Nickleby?', 'Of what consequence?', 'Ay, is it of the greatest consequence?', 'Of the very greatest consequence,', 'Mrs. Nickleby cannot be ignorant, of the immense impression which that sweet girl has--', 'Pluck! beware!', 'Pyke is right, I was not to mention it. Pyke is very right. Thank you, Pyke.', 'Well now, really, Such delicacy as that, I never saw!', 'But when, when I see so much sweetness and beauty on the one hand, and so much ardour and devotion on the other, I--pardon me, Pyke, I didn', 'We promised Sir Mulberry and Lord Frederick, that we', 'Not the least in the world last night, sir, with many thanks to his lordship and Sir Mulberry for doing me the honour to inquire; not the least--which is the more singular, as I really am very subject to colds, indeed--very subject. I had a cold once, I think it was in the year eighteen hundred and seventeen; let me see, four and five are nine, and--yes, eighteen hundred and seventeen, that I thought I never should get rid of; actually and seriously, that I thought I never should get rid of. I was only cured at last by a remedy that I don orth of the finest bran, and sit with your head in it for twenty minutes every night just before going to bed; at least, I don s a most extraordinary cure--a most extraordinary cure. I used it for the first time, I recollect, the day after Christmas Day, and by the middle of April following the cold was gone. It seems quite a miracle when you come to think of it, for I had it ever since the beginning of September.', 'with many thanks to his lordship and Sir Mulberry for doing me the honour to inquire; not the least--which is the more singular, as I really am very subject to colds, indeed--very subject. I had a cold once, I think it was in the year eighteen hundred and seventeen; let me see, four and five are nine, and--yes, eighteen hundred and seventeen, that I thought I never should get rid of; actually and seriously, that I thought I never should get rid of. I was only cured at last by a remedy that I don orth of the finest bran, and sit with your head in it for twenty minutes every night just before going to bed; at least, I don s a most extraordinary cure--a most extraordinary cure. I used it for the first time, I recollect, the day after Christmas Day, and by the middle of April following the cold was gone. It seems quite a miracle when you come to think of it, for I had it ever since the beginning of September.', 'What an afflicting calamity!', 'Perfectly horrid!', 'But it t it, Pluck?', 'That is the circumstance which gives it such a thrilling interest,', 'But come, we must not forget our mission in the pleasure of this interview. We come on a mission, Mrs. Nickleby.', 'On a mission,', 'From Sir Mulberry, You must be very dull here.', 'Rather dull, I confess,', 'We bring the compliments of Sir Mulberry Hawk, and a thousand entreaties that you', 'Oh dear! I never go out at all, never.', 'And that is the very reason, my dear Mrs. Nickleby, why you should go out tonight, Pyke, entreat Mrs. Nickleby.', 'Oh, pray do,', 'You positively must,', 'You are very kind, but--', 'There  remonstrated Mr Pluck;  ll not be so cruel as to disappoint the whole party, Mrs. Nickleby?', 'You are so very pressing, that I scarcely know what to say,', 'Say nothing; not a word, not a word, my dearest madam, Mrs. Nickleby, there is the most trifling, the most excusable breach of confidence in what I am about to say; and yet if my friend Pyke there overheard it--such is that man d have me out before dinner-time.', 'Mrs. Nickleby, there is the most trifling, the most excusable breach of confidence in what I am about to say; and yet if my friend Pyke there overheard it--such is that man d have me out before dinner-time.', 'there is the most trifling, the most excusable breach of confidence in what I am about to say; and yet if my friend Pyke there overheard it--such is that man d have me out before dinner-time.', 'Your daughter has made a conquest--a conquest on which I may congratulate you. Sir Mulberry, my dear ma', 'Hah! What is this! what do I behold!', 'What DO you behold, my dear fellow?', 'It is the face, the countenance, the expression, feebly portrayed, imperfectly caught, but still THE face, THE countenance, THE expression.', 'I recognise it at this distance! Is it not, my dear madam, the faint similitude of--', 'It is my daughter', 'And I  said Mr. Pyke;  ll send round to the public-house for a pot of milk half-and-half, positively and actually I', 'At twenty minutes before seven, then, the coach will be here. One more look--one little look--at that sweet face. Ah! here it is. Unmoved, unchanged! Oh, Pluck! Pluck!', 'smifligate s excitement than any previous acquaintance with the etymology of the word that smifligation and bloodshed must be in the main one and the same thing, was alarmed beyond expression, lest something should occur. Fortunately, however, Mr. Pyke confined himself to mere verbal smifligation, and they reached their box with no more serious interruption by the way, than a desire on the part of the same pugnacious gentleman to ', 'We have been--we have been--toasting your lovely daughter, Mrs Nickleby,', 'Oh, ho! wine in, truth out.--You are very kind, Sir Mulberry.', 'No, no upon my soul! It s kind, upon my soul it is. It was so kind of you to come tonight.', 'So very kind of you to invite me, you mean, Sir Mulberry,', 'I am so anxious to know you, so anxious to cultivate your good opinion, so desirous that there should be a delicious kind of harmonious family understanding between us, that you mustn m disinterested in what I do. I', 'I am sure you can  replied Mrs. Nickleby. ', 'You have much too open and generous a countenance for that.', 'What an extraordinary observer you are!', 'Oh no, indeed, I don', 'I am quite afraid of you, Upon my soul, I am afraid of Mrs Nickleby. She is so immensely sharp.', 'But where  inquired Mrs. Nickleby.  t be here without him. I hope he', 'Pyke, Where', 'Where', 'Pluck, s action, and turning the lie over to his friend,  s Ralph Nickleby?', 'Why not? What is the matter?', 'Hush! Lord Frederick, do you recognise the tones of that voice?', 'Deyvle take me if I didn', 'Lor, my lord! s mama, thrusting her head round the curtain. ', 'YOU here, mama! Is it possible!', 'Possible, my dear? Yes.', 'Why who--who on earth is that you have with you, mama?', 'Who do you suppose, my dear? s edification.  s Mr. Pyke, Mr. Pluck, Sir Mulberry Hawk, and Lord Frederick Verisopht.', 'There', 'Gracious Heaven! How comes she in such society?', 'My dear Kate, How ill you looked a moment ago! You quite frightened me, I declare!', 'How ill you looked a moment ago! You quite frightened me, I declare!', 'It was mere fancy, mama,--the--the--reflection of the lights perhaps,', 'Don', 'Mrs. Wititterly is delighted, delighted, my lord, I am sure, with this opportunity of contracting an acquaintance which, I trust, my lord, we shall improve. Julia, my dear, you must not allow yourself to be too much excited, you must not. Indeed you must not. Mrs. Wititterly is of a most excitable nature, Sir Mulberry. The snuff of a candle, the wick of a lamp, the bloom on a peach, the down on a butterfly. You might blow her away, my lord; you might blow her away.', 'delighted, my lord, I am sure, with this opportunity of contracting an acquaintance which, I trust, my lord, we shall improve. Julia, my dear, you must not allow yourself to be too much excited, you must not. Indeed you must not. Mrs. Wititterly is of a most excitable nature, Sir Mulberry. The snuff of a candle, the wick of a lamp, the bloom on a peach, the down on a butterfly. You might blow her away, my lord; you might blow her away.', 'I take an interest, my lord, such an interest in the drama.', 'such an interest in the drama.', 'Ye--es. It', 'I  said Mrs. Wititterly. ', 'Ye--es! He was a clayver man.', 'Do you know, my lord, I find I take so much more interest in his plays, after having been to that dear little dull house he was born in! Were you ever there, my lord?', 'No, nayver,', 'Then really you ought to go, my lord, I don ve seen the place and written your name in the little book, somehow or other you seem to be inspired; it kindles up quite a fire within one.', 'Ye--es! I shall certainly go there.', 'Julia, my life, you are deceiving his lordship--unintentionally, my lord, she is deceiving you. It is your poetical temperament, my dear--your ethereal soul--your fervid imagination, which throws you into a glow of genius and excitement. There is nothing in the place, my dear--nothing, nothing.', 'I think there must be something in the place, for, soon after I was married, I went to Stratford with my poor dear Mr. Nickleby, in a post-chaise from Birmingham--was it a post-chaise though? yes, it must have been a post-chaise, because I recollect remarking at the time that the driver had a green shade over his left eye;--in a post-chaise from Birmingham, and after we had seen Shakespeare  continued Mrs. Nickleby, considering.  am, that my son didn', 'Don t hurry,', 'Nay, then--', 'You had best not seek to detain me, sir!', 'And why not? My dear creature, now why do you keep up this show of displeasure?', 'SHOW! How dare you presume to speak to me, sir--to address me--to come into my presence?', 'You look prettier in a passion, Miss Nickleby,', 'I hold you in the bitterest detestation and contempt, sir, If you find any attraction in looks of disgust and aversion, you--let me rejoin my friends, sir, instantly. Whatever considerations may have withheld me thus far, I will disregard them all, and take a course that even YOU might feel, if you do not immediately suffer me to proceed.', 'If you find any attraction in looks of disgust and aversion, you--let me rejoin my friends, sir, instantly. Whatever considerations may have withheld me thus far, I will disregard them all, and take a course that even YOU might feel, if you do not immediately suffer me to proceed.', 'If no regard for my sex or helpless situation will induce you to desist from this coarse and unmanly persecution, I have a brother who will resent it dearly, one day.', 'Upon my soul! she looks more beautiful, and I like her better in this mood, than when her eyes are cast down, and she is in perfect repose!', 'There, Didn s honour would be our own? Why here it is, done in four-and-twenty hours.', 'Ye--es, But I have been tied to the old woman all ni-ight.', 'Hear him, Hear this discontented grumbler. Isn t it an infernal shame?', 'Isn  demanded Verisopht.  t it so?', 'Wasn  repeated Sir Mulberry.  t I been sounding your praises in her ears, and bearing her pretty sulks and peevishness all night for you? What sort of stuff do you think I t I deserve even gratitude in return?', 'You  said the poor young lord, taking his friend Upon my life you', 'And I have done right, have I?', 'Quite ri-ght.', 'And like a poor, silly, good-natured, friendly dog as I am, eh?', 'Ye--es, ye--es; like a friend,', 'Well then, I s go and have our revenge on the German baron and the Frenchman, who cleaned you out so handsomely last night.', '"Cherizette," said the Lady Flabella, inserting her mouse-like feet in the blue satin slippers, which had unwittingly occasioned the half-playful half-angry altercation between herself and the youthful Colonel Befillaire, in the Duke of Mincefenille EAU-DE-COLOGNE, S', '"MERCIE--thank you," said the Lady Flabella, as the lively but devoted Cherizette plentifully besprinkled with the fragrant compound the Lady Flabella', 'At this instant, while the Lady Flabella yet inhaled that delicious fragrance by holding the MOUCHOIR to her exquisite, but thoughtfully-chiselled nose, the door of the BOUDOIR (artfully concealed by rich hangings of silken damask, the hue of Italy', 'The Lady Flabella, with an agitation she could not repress, hastily tore off the ENVELOPE and broke the scented seal. It WAS from Befillaire--the young, the slim, the low-voiced--HER OWN Befillaire.', 'Oh, charming! s patroness, who was sometimes taken literary. ', 'Sweet, indeed! So voluptuous, is it not--so soft?', 'Yes, I think it is, very soft.', 'Close the book, Miss Nickleby, I can hear nothing more today; I should be sorry to disturb the impression of that sweet description. Close the book.', 'It was the fright of that--that noise and confusion last night,', 'How very odd!', 'How did you come to know Lord Frederick, and those other delightful creatures, child?', 'I met them at my uncle', 'Have you known them long?', 'No, Not long.', 'I was very glad of the opportunity which that respectable person, your mother, gave us of being known to them, Some friends of ours were on the very point of introducing us, which makes it quite remarkable.', 'They asked permission to call, I gave it them of course.', 'Do you expect them today?', 'They are here now,', 'Miss Nickleby! s attempting to quit the room, without her permission first had and obtained.  t think of going.', 'You are very good! But--', 'For goodness t agitate me by making me speak so much, Dear me, Miss Nickleby, I beg--', 'The most extraordinary thing in the world, the most extraordinary thing. As Lord Frederick and Sir Mulberry drove up to the door, Pyke and I had that instant knocked.', 'That instant knocked,', 'No matter how you came, so that you are here, I am delighted, I am sure.', 'And how is Miss Nickleby?', 'Why, she complains of suffering from the fright of last night, I am sure I don', 'And yet you look, and yet you look--', 'Beyond everything,', 'I am afraid Sir Mulberry is a flatterer, my lord,', 'Oh, deyvlish!', 'Neither does Miss Nickleby look the worse, She was always handsome, but upon my soul, ma', 'Pyke,', 'Well, Pluck,', 'Is there anybody, anybody you know, that Mrs. Wititterly', 'Reminds me of! Of course there is.', 'Who do you mean? The D. of B.?', 'The C. of B., The beautiful sister is the countess; not the duchess.', 'True, the C. of B. The resemblance is wonderful!', 'Perfectly startling,', 'My lord, I am delighted--honoured--proud. Be seated again, my lord, pray. I am proud, indeed--most proud.', 'It is an honour, indeed! Julia, my soul, you will suffer for this tomorrow.', 'Suffer!', 'The reaction, my lord, the reaction, This violent strain upon the nervous system over, my lord, what ensues? A sinking, a depression, a lowness, a lassitude, a debility. My lord, if Sir Tumley Snuffim was to see that delicate creature at this moment, he would not give a--a--THIS for her life.', 'Not THAT, Sir Tumley Snuffim would not give that for Mrs Wititterly', 'Mrs. Wititterly, is Sir Tumley Snuffim', 'I believe I was,', 'No, sir, it was not. It had not even that recommendation,', 'Mrs. Wititterly is quite a martyr,', 'I THINK I am,', 'I think you are, my dear Julia, If anybody, my lord, will produce to me a greater martyr than Mrs Wititterly, all I can say is, that I shall be glad to see that martyr, whether male or female--that', 'Miss Nickleby, I wish to speak to you very gravely. I am sorry to have to do it, upon my word I am very sorry, but you leave me no alternative, Miss Nickleby.', 'Your behaviour, Miss Nickleby, is very far from pleasing me--very far. I am very anxious indeed that you should do well, but you may depend upon it, Miss Nickleby, you will not, if you go on as you do.', 'Ma', 'Don t, or you', 'You needn  resumed Mrs. Wititterly,  t direct your glances towards me, I am not Sir Mulberry, no, nor Lord Frederick Verisopht, Miss Nickleby, nor am I Mr. Pyke, nor Mr. Pluck either.', 'I am not Sir Mulberry, no, nor Lord Frederick Verisopht, Miss Nickleby, nor am I Mr. Pyke, nor Mr. Pluck either.', 'If such things had been done when I was a young girl, I don', 'I don', 'I don  murmured Kate. ', 'Don  said Mrs. Wititterly, with a shrillness of tone quite surprising in so great an invalid. ', 'I do hear you, ma  replied Kate, ', 'I have always considered you a particularly well-behaved young person for your station in life, and as you are a person of healthy appearance, and neat in your dress and so forth, I have taken an interest in you, as I do still, considering that I owe a sort of duty to that respectable old female, your mother. For these reasons, Miss Nickleby, I must tell you once for all, and begging you to mind what I say, that I must insist upon your immediately altering your very forward behaviour to the gentlemen who visit at this house. It really is not becoming, it is improper--quite improper.', 'it is improper--quite improper.', 'Oh! is not this, is not this, too cruel, too hard to bear! Is it not enough that I should have suffered as I have, night and day; that I should almost have sunk in my own estimation from very shame of having been brought into contact with such people; but must I also be exposed to this unjust and most unfounded charge!', 'You will have the goodness to recollect, Miss Nickleby, that when you use such terms as "unjust", and "unfounded", you charge me, in effect, with stating that which is untrue.', 'I do, Whether you make this accusation of yourself, or at the prompting of others, is alike to me. I say it IS vilely, grossly, wilfully untrue. Is it possible! that anyone of my own sex can have sat by, and not have seen the misery these men have caused me? Is it possible that you, ma', 'that anyone of my own sex can have sat by, and not have seen the misery these men have caused me? Is it possible that you, ma', 'What is the matter? Heavens, what do I see? Julia! Julia! look up, my life, look up!', 'Heavens, what do I see? Julia! Julia! look up, my life, look up!', 'Run for Sir Tumley, I knew it, Miss Nickleby, that society has been too much for her. This is all soul, you know, every bit of it.', 'Very good! He defies the usurer, does he? Well, we shall see. "Honesty is the best policy," is it? We', 'He is content, to set his known character and conduct against the power of money--dross, as he calls it. Why, what a dull blockhead this fellow must be! Dross to, dross! Who', 'Me, Your niece.', 'What of her?', 'She', 'Here!', 'What does she want?', 'I don  rejoined Newman. ', 'No, Show her in! Stay. There, NOW she may come in.', 'Well, Well, my--dear. What now?', 'I can guess the cause of this! I can--I can--guess the cause. Well! Well! Where is the harm? only a few tears; and it', 'What is the matter?', 'The matter which brings me to you, sir, is one which should call the blood up into your cheeks, and make you burn to hear, as it does me to tell. I have been wronged; my feelings have been outraged, insulted, wounded past all healing, and by your friends.', 'Friends! I have no friends, girl.', 'By the men I saw here, then, If they were no friends of yours, and you knew what they were,--oh, the more shame on you, uncle, for bringing me among them. To have subjected me to what I was exposed to here, through any misplaced confidence or imperfect knowledge of your guests, would have required some strong excuse; but if you did it--as I now believe you did--knowing them well, it was most dastardly and cruel.', 'There is some of that boy', 'I hope there is! I should be proud to know it. I am young, uncle, and all the difficulties and miseries of my situation have kept it down, but I have been roused today beyond all endurance, and come what may, I WILL NOT, as I am your brother', 'What insults, girl?', 'Remember what took place here, and ask yourself, Uncle, you must--I am sure you will--release me from such vile and degrading companionship as I am exposed to now. I do not mean, I do not mean to be angry and violent--I beg your pardon if I have seemed so, dear uncle,--but you do not know what I have suffered, you do not indeed. You cannot tell what the heart of a young girl is--I have no right to expect you should; but when I tell you that I am wretched, and that my heart is breaking, I am sure you will help me. I am sure, I am sure you will!', 'I have gone on day after day, in the hope that this persecution would cease; I have gone on day after day, compelled to assume the appearance of cheerfulness, when I was most unhappy. I have had no counsellor, no adviser, no one to protect me. Mama supposes that these are honourable men, rich and distinguished, and how CAN I--how can I undeceive her--when she is so happy in these little delusions, which are the only happiness she has? The lady with whom you placed me, is not the person to whom I could confide matters of so much delicacy, and I have come at last to you, the only friend I have at hand--almost the only friend I have at all--to entreat and implore you to assist me.', 'How can I assist you, child?', 'You have influence with one of these men, I KNOW, Would not a word from you induce them to desist from this unmanly course?', 'No, at least--that--I can', 'Can', 'No, I can', 'We are connected in business, s face,  t afford to offend them. What is it after all? We have all our trials, and this is one of yours. Some girls would be proud to have such gallants at their feet.', 'Proud!', 'I don  rejoined Ralph, raising his forefinger,  s not much to bear. If this young lord does dog your footsteps, and whisper his drivelling inanities in your ears, what of it? It t last long. Some other novelty will spring up one day, and you will be released. In the mean time--', 'In the mean time, I am to be the scorn of my own sex, and the toy of the other; justly condemned by all women of right feeling, and despised by all honest and honourable men; sunken in my own esteem, and degraded in every eye that looks upon me. No, not if I work my fingers to the bone, not if I am driven to the roughest and hardest labour. Do not mistake me. I will not disgrace your recommendation. I will remain in the house in which it placed me, until I am entitled to leave it by the terms of my engagement; though, mind, I see these men no more. When I quit it, I will hide myself from them and you, and, striving to support my mother by hard service, I will live, at least, in peace, and trust in God to help me.', 'Don  said Newman, gliding out of his recess, and accompanying her across the hall.  t cry, don  Two very large tears, by-the-bye, were running down Newman', 'I see how it is, s eyes with it, as gently as if she were an infant.  re giving way now. Yes, yes, very good; that', 'Don  whispered Newman. ', 'God bless you, God bless you.', 'Same to you, Ha, ha, ha! Ho! ho! ho!', 'Ugh! you shall pay for this. Oh! you shall pay for this!', 'You are out of spirits,', 'Not I! I was thinking about my sister, Smike.', 'Sister!', 'Ay.', 'Is she like you?', 'Why, so they say, only a great deal handsomer.', 'She must be VERY beautiful,', 'Anybody who didn', 'I don  replied Smike, shaking his head. ', 'Shall I ever see your sister?', 'To be sure, we shall all be together one of these days--when we are rich, Smike.', 'How is it that you, who are so kind and good to me, have nobody to be kind to you? I cannot make that out.', 'Why, it is a long story, and one you would have some difficulty in comprehending, I fear. I have an enemy--you understand what that is?', 'Oh, yes, I understand that,', 'Well, it is owing to him, He is rich, and not so easily punished as YOUR old enemy, Mr. Squeers. He is my uncle, but he is a villain, and has done me wrong.', 'Has he though? What is his name? Tell me his name.', 'Ralph--Ralph Nickleby.', 'Ralph Nickleby, Ralph. I', 'Good-evening, sir, I bring a communication. Hem!', 'From whom and what about? You are unusually mysterious tonight.', 'Cold, perhaps, cold, perhaps. That is the fault of my position--not of myself, Mr. Johnson. My position as a mutual friend requires it, sir.', 'Have the goodness to read that, sir.', 'Do you know the contents of this note, sir?', 'Yes,', 'And how dare you bring it here, sir? Had you no fear of being kicked downstairs, sir?', 'Had you no fear of being kicked downstairs, sir?', 'Then, you had better follow that article of your dress, sir, or you may find yourself very disagreeably deceived, and that within a dozen seconds.', 'I say, Johnson, none of that, you know. No tricks with a gentleman', 'Leave the room, How could you presume to come here on such an errand, you scoundrel?', 'Pooh! pooh! There--that', 'Enough! Take yourself off, sir.', 'Pooh! pooh! I tell you, I wasn', 'You had better be careful how you indulge in such jokes again, or you may find an allusion to pulling noses rather a dangerous reminder for the subject of your facetiousness. Was it written in joke, too, pray?', 'No, no, that  returned the actor; ', 'Come, sir, Have the goodness to explain.', 'Why, I  said Mr. Folair, sitting himself down in a chair with great coolness. ', 'What do you mean by a reception?', 'Jupiter! what an unsophisticated shepherd you are, Johnson! Why, applause from the house when you first come on. So he has gone on night after night, never getting a hand, and you getting a couple of rounds at least, and sometimes three, till at length he got quite desperate, and had half a mind last night to play Tybalt with a real sword, and pink you--not dangerously, but just enough to lay you up for a month or two.', 'Very considerate,', 'Yes, I think it was under the circumstances; his professional reputation being at stake, But his heart failed him, and he cast about for some other way of annoying you, and making himself popular at the same time--for that  said Mr. Folair, stopping to make a calculation in his mind,  t wonder if it had got him an engagement in London. However, he was obliged to try some other mode of getting popular, and this one occurred to him. It d have got it into the paper; if you had sworn the peace against him, it would have been in the paper too, and he t you see?', 'Oh, certainly, but suppose I were to turn the tables, and pull HIS nose, what then? Would that make his fortune?', 'Why, I don  replied Mr. Folair, scratching his head,  t be any romance about it, and he wouldn t calculate much upon that, for you t suspect you of showing fight. If you did, however, he has a way of getting out of it easily, depend upon that.', 'because there wouldn t be favourably known. To tell you the truth though, he didn re always so mild-spoken, and are so popular among the women, that we didn', 'Has he? We will try, tomorrow morning. In the meantime, you can give whatever account of our interview you like best. Good-night.', 'Oh! are you there?', 'Slave!', 'Object of my scorn and hatred! I hold ye in contempt.', 'But they shall not protect ye! They shall not protect ye--boy!', 'Do you see this, monster? Do you see THIS?', 'Come, apologise for the insolent note you wrote to me last night, and waste no more time in talking.', 'Never!', 'Yes--yes--yes! For my sake--for mine, Lenville--forego all idle forms, unless you would see me a blighted corse at your feet.', 'This is affecting! The ties of nature are strong. The weak husband and the father--the father that is yet to be--relents. I apologise.', 'Humbly and submissively?', 'Humbly and submissively, But only to save her,--for a time will come--', 'But only to save her,--for a time will come--', 'Very good, I hope Mrs. Lenville may have a good one; and when it does come, and you are a father, you shall retract it if you have the courage. There. Be careful, sir, to what lengths your jealousy carries you another time; and be careful, also, before you venture too far, to ascertain your rival  With this parting advice Nicholas picked up Mr. Lenville', 'Well, Smike, is there any letter yet?', 'Yes, I got this one from the post-office.', 'From Newman Noggs, it', 'At all events I should prepare them here for the possibility of my going away suddenly, I should lose no time in doing that.', 'Well, Mr. Johnson, next week for Ryde, then for Winchester, then for--', 'next week for Ryde, then for Winchester, then for--', 'I have some reason to fear, that before you leave here my career with you will have closed.', 'Closed!', 'Closed!', 'Why he don s going! Hoity toity! Nonsense.', 'Let me see, s wig, the better to arrive at a cool-headed view of the whole case.  ll have posters out the first thing in the morning, announcing positively your last appearance for tomorrow.', 'But perhaps it may not be my last appearance, you know, Unless I am summoned away, I should be sorry to inconvenience you by leaving before the end of the week.', 'Unless I am summoned away, I should be sorry to inconvenience you by leaving before the end of the week.', 'So much the better, We can have positively your last appearance, on Thursday--re-engagement for one night more, on Friday--and, yielding to the wishes of numerous influential patrons, who were disappointed in obtaining seats, on Saturday. That ought to bring three very decent houses.', 'Then I am to make three last appearances, am I?', 'Yes, three is not enough, and it t help it we can s no use in talking. A novelty would be very desirable. You couldn s back, could you?', 'No, I couldn', 'It has drawn money before now, What do you think of a brilliant display of fireworks?', 'That it would be rather expensive,', 'Eighteen-pence would do it, You on the top of a pair of steps with the phenomenon in an attitude; "Farewell!" on a transparency behind; and nine people at the wings with a squib in each hand--all the dozen and a half going off at once--it would be very grand--awful from the front, quite awful.', 'Heigho! s chair, after telegraphing the needful directions to Smike, who had been playing a meagre tailor in the interlude, with one skirt to his coat, and a little pocket-handkerchief with a large hole in it, and a woollen nightcap, and a red nose, and other distinctive marks peculiar to tailors on the stage. ', 'Over, Mr. Johnson!', 'It was an ungallant speech, certainly, I would not have made it if I had known you had been within hearing.', 'What a dear that Mr. Digby is!', 'I', 'Oh you naughty thing! I don', 'How kind it is of you, to sit waiting here for him night after night, night after night, no matter how tired you are; and taking so much pains with him, and doing it all with as much delight and readiness as if you were coining gold by it!', 'He well deserves all the kindness I can show him, and a great deal more, He is the most grateful, single-hearted, affectionate creature that ever breathed.', 'So odd, too, isn', 'God help him, and those who have made him so; he is indeed,', 'He is such a devilish close chap, Nobody can ever get anything out of him.', 'What SHOULD they get out of him?', 'Zooks! what a fire-eater you are, Johnson! I', 'Poor fellow! it is pretty plain, I should think, that he has not the intellect to have been about anything of much importance to them or anybody else,', 'Ay, but that involves the whole question, you know.', 'What question?', 'Why, the who he is and what he is, and how you two, who are so different, came to be such close companions, That s mouth.', 'The "everybody" of the theatre, I suppose?', 'In it and out of it too, Why, you know, Lenville says--', 'I thought I had silenced him effectually,', 'Perhaps you have, if you have, he said this before he was silenced: Lenville says that you s only the mystery about you that has caused you to go down with the people here, and that Crummles keeps it up for his own sake; though Lenville says he don s anything at all in it, except your having got into a scrape and run away from somewhere, for doing something or other.', 'Oh!', 'That  added Mr. Folair.  t agree with him, you know. He says he takes Digby to be more knave than fool; and old Fluggers, who does the heavy business you know, HE says that when he delivered messages at Covent Garden the season before last, there used to be a pickpocket hovering about the coach-stand who had exactly the face of Digby; though, as he very properly says, Digby may not be the same, but only his brother, or some near relation.', 'Oh!', 'Yes, that d tell you, because really you ought to know. Oh! here em.', 'So these are some of the stories they invent about us, and bandy from mouth to mouth! If a man would commit an inexpiable offence against any society, large or small, let him be successful. They will forgive him any crime but that.', 'You surely don', 'Not I, If I were going to remain here, I might think it worth my while to embroil myself. As it is, let them talk till they are hoarse. But here, here comes the subject of a portion of their good-nature, so let he and I say good night together.', 'No, I will not let either of you say anything of the kind, You must come home and see mama, who only came to Portsmouth today, and is dying to behold you. Led, my dear, persuade Mr Johnson.', 'Oh, I  returned Miss Ledrook, with considerable vivacity,  t persuade him--', 'Mr. and Mrs. Lillyvick have taken lodgings in our house, and share our sitting-room for the present, Won', 'Surely, I can require no possible inducement beyond your invitation.', 'Oh no! I dare say, Upon my word!', 'Upon my word!', 'Come, it', 'My dear Led, how you do talk!', 'You have seen him, sir?', 'No, really I never did,', 'You never saw my friend Glavormelly, sir! s papa. ', 'Oh, he is dead, is he?', 'He is, but he isn s the shame. He was a--. Well, no matter. He is gone to that bourne from whence no traveller returns. I hope he is appreciated THERE.', 'Well, Mr. Lillyvick, and how are you?', 'Quite well, sir, There is nothing like the married state, sir, depend upon it.', 'Indeed!', 'Ah! nothing like it, sir, How do you think, how do you think she looks tonight?', 'As handsome as ever,', 'Why, there  whispered the collector,  t it fascination, sir?', 'You', 'Ha, ha, ha! No. Do you think I am though, eh? Perhaps I may be, perhaps I may be. I say, I couldn t have done much better yourself, could you--eh--could you?', 'Hush! Don  said Miss Ledrook, peeping in from the bedroom. ', 'You needn  said Mrs. Lillyvick. ', 'She is only a little weak and nervous; she has been so ever since the morning.', 'Oh, that', 'Oh yes, that t make a fuss about it,', 'Dear me, my dear!', 'Don am, if you please.', 'Pray, pa, don', 'Don', 'Talk in that way.', 'Why not? I hope you don s anybody here who is to prevent my talking as I like?', 'Nobody wants to, pa,', 'Nobody would if they did want to, I am not ashamed of myself, Snevellicci is my name; I m in town. If I ve been mentioned in the newspapers before now, haven ll tell you what; if I found out that any man had been tampering with the affections of my daughter, I wouldn d astonish him without talking; that', 'I love   said Mr. Snevellicci, looking round the table,  em, every one.', 'Not every one,', 'Yes, every one,', 'That would include the married ladies, you know,', 'I love them too, sir,', 'One good turn deserves another, I love them and they love me.', 'What is the matter with the men! Are they mad? What do you mean to do? What do you want to do? What is the matter with you?', 'What do you mean to do? What do you want to do? What is the matter with you?', 'Look here, sir, here is purity and elegance combined, whose feelings have been outraged--violated, sir!', 'Lor, what nonsense he talks! Nobody has said anything to me.', 'Said, Henrietta! Didn  Mr Lillyvick couldn', 'Well! Do you suppose nobody is ever to look at me? A pretty thing to be married indeed, if that was law!', 'You didn', 'Mind it! You ought to go down on your knees and beg everybody', 'Pardon, my dear?', 'Yes, and mine first, Do you suppose I ain s proper and what', 'To be sure, Do you suppose WE shouldn', 'Do you suppose THEY don  said Miss Snevellicci', 'It  said Crummles, dragging Nicholas to the little hole in the curtain that he might look through at the London manager.  s the fame of the phenomenon--that t engage her either, unless they engage Mrs. Crummles too--twenty pound a week for the pair; or I ll throw in myself and the two boys, and they shall have the family for thirty. I can s the way some of the London people do, and it always answers. Thirty pound a week--it s dirt cheap.', 'I will, Heaven knows I have remained here for the best, and sorely against my own will; but even now I may have dallied too long. What can have happened? Smike, my good fellow, here--take my purse. Put our things together, and pay what little debts we owe--quick, and we shall be in time for the morning coach. I will only tell them that we are going, and will return to you immediately.', 'So goodbye, goodbye, goodbye.', 'I can  replied Nicholas. ', 'We  returned Crummles.  t we have one last night more?', 'Not an hour--not a minute,', 'Won', 'I couldn  rejoined Nicholas. ', 'Dear me, dear me, if he only acted like that, what a deal of money he d have been very useful to me. But he don s good for him. He is an impetuous youth. Young men are rash, very rash.', 'Bless my heart, s arms, ', 'what are you about?', 'I am not a man to be moved by a pretty face, There is a grinning skull beneath it, and men like me who look and work below the surface see that, and not its delicate covering. And yet I almost like the girl, or should if she had been less proudly and squeamishly brought up. If the boy were drowned or hanged, and the mother dead, this house should be her home. I wish they were, with all my soul.', 'There is a grinning skull beneath it, and men like me who look and work below the surface see that, and not its delicate covering. And yet I almost like the girl, or should if she had been less proudly and squeamishly brought up. If the boy were drowned or hanged, and the mother dead, this house should be her home. I wish they were, with all my soul.', 'How now?', 'Oh! I thought you rang.', 'Stop!', 'I did ring.', 'I knew you did.', 'Then why do you offer to go if you know that?', 'I thought you rang to say you didn  replied Newman. ', 'How dare you pry, and peer, and stare at me, sirrah?', 'Stare! at YOU! Ha, ha!', 'Be careful, sir, Let me have no drunken fooling here. Do you see this parcel?', 'It', 'Carry it into the city; to Cross, in Broad Street, and leave it there--quick. Do you hear?', 'Walk in if you please,', 'Bless us! what did you want, sir?', 'You have forgotten me, I wonder at that. That nobody should remember me who knew me in other days, is natural enough; but there are few people who, seeing me once, forget me NOW.', 'I wonder at that. That nobody should remember me who knew me in other days, is natural enough; but there are few people who, seeing me once, forget me NOW.', 'I did forget you, I declare, and I am ashamed of myself for doing so; for you are a kind, good creature, Mr. Noggs. Sit down and tell me all about Miss Nickleby. Poor dear thing! I haven', 'How', 'Why, the truth is, Mr. Noggs, that I have been out on a visit--the first visit I have made for fifteen years.', 'That is a long time,', 'So it is a very long time to look back upon in years, though, somehow or other, thank Heaven, the solitary days roll away peacefully and happily enough, I have a brother, Mr Noggs--the only relation I have--and all that time I never saw him once. Not that we ever quarrelled, but he was apprenticed down in the country, and he got married there; and new ties and affections springing up about him, he forgot a poor little woman like me, as it was very reasonable he should, you know. Don  said the miniature painter, brightening up and clapping her hands,  t know how many fields, and a man in livery waiting at table, and cows and horses and pigs and I don', 'But bless my life, what a foolish creature I must seem to you, Mr. Noggs! I shouldn t seen Miss Nickleby.', 'Have you seen the old lady?', 'You mean Mrs. Nickleby? Then I tell you what, Mr Noggs, if you want to keep in the good books in that quarter, you had better not call her the old lady any more, for I suspect she wouldn t make anything of her: so, to tell you the truth, I took it into my head to be grand too, and came away in state. I thought she would have come round again before this, but she hasn', 'About Miss Nickleby--', 'Why, she was here twice while I was away, I was afraid she mightn s-its-name Place, so I thought I t see her, write.', 'Ah!', 'However, I want to hear all the news about them from you, How is the old rough and tough monster of Golden Square? Well, of course; such people always are. I don', 'Damn him! like a false hound.', 'Gracious, Mr. Noggs, you quite terrify me!', 'I should have spoilt his features yesterday afternoon if I could have afforded it, I was very near it. I was obliged to put my hands in my pockets, and keep  t been afraid of making bad worse. I shall double-lock myself in with him and have it out before I die, I', 'I shall scream if you don  said Miss La Creevy;  m sure I shan', 'Never mind, He t think that. Not he, not he. Never mind, I', 'There, that m better, and I', 'God forgive me for saying so, but I really feel as if I could stick this into him with pleasure.', 'She won  said Newman.  s a comfort.', 'Stop! she should have left there, weeks ago.', '--If we had known of this, But we didn s weak--poor thing--weak. The dear young man will be here tonight.', 'Heart alive! He will do something desperate, Mr Noggs, if you tell him all at once.', 'Depend upon it, if you are not very careful in breaking out the truth to him, he will do some violence upon his uncle or one of these men that will bring some terrible calamity upon his own head, and grief and sorrow to us all.', 'I never thought of that, I came to ask you to receive his sister in case he brought her here, but--', 'But this is a matter of much greater importance, that you might have been sure of before you came, but the end of this, nobody can foresee, unless you are very guarded and careful.', 'What CAN I do? If he was to talk of pistoling  em right."', 'He must have time to cool before he can possibly do anything, That is of the greatest consequence. He must not be told until late at night.', 'But he  replied Newman.  t keep it from him when he asks me.', 'Then you must go out, Mr. Noggs, You can easily have been kept away by business, and must not return till nearly midnight.', 'Then he will come straight here,', 'So I suppose, but he won ll go straight to the city the instant you leave me, make up matters with Mrs. Nickleby, and take her away to the theatre, so that he may not even know where his sister lives.', 'London at last! It seemed to me as though we should never reach it.', 'And yet you came along at a tidy pace too,', 'Ay, I know that, but I have been very anxious to be at my journey', 'Well, if the way seemed long with such cattle as you', 'Do you know what time he will be home?', 'Ah, Mr. Johnson! Welcome, sir. How well you', 'Pardon me, My question--I am extremely anxious to know.', 'Why, he has a troublesome affair of business, and will not be home before twelve o', 'An expensive place, I dare say, but a pint of wine and a biscuit are no great debauch wherever they are had. And yet I don', 'It is remarkable too, if it had been "Kate" or "Kate Nickleby," I should not have been so much surprised: but "little Kate Nickleby!"', 'Little Kate Nickleby!', 'I was right, And it was the man I supposed.', 'As there was a proper objection to drinking her in heel-taps, we', 'Little Kate Nickleby,', 'The jade! She re impatient and he isn', 'Infernal cunning,', 'I am afraid, that the old woman has grown jea-a-lous, and locked her up. Upon my soul it looks like it.', 'If they quarrel and little Nickleby goes home to her mother, so much the better, I can do anything with the old lady. She', 'Egad that  returned the other voice. ', 'Let me have a word with you, sir,', 'With me, sir?', 'I said with you,', 'A mysterious stranger, upon my soul!', 'Will you step apart with me for a few minutes, or do you refuse?', 'There, sir, my business you will guess.', 'Your name and address?', 'I shall give you neither,', 'If there is a gentleman in this party, he will acquaint me with the name and residence of this man.', 'I am the brother of the young lady who has been the subject of conversation here, I denounce this person as a liar, and impeach him as a coward. If he has a friend here, he will save him the disgrace of the paltry attempt to conceal his name--and utterly useless one--for I will find it out, nor leave him until I have.', 'Let the fellow talk, I have nothing serious to say to boys of his station; and his pretty sister shall save him a broken head, if he talks till midnight.', 'You are a base and spiritless scoundrel! and shall be proclaimed so to the world. I WILL know you; I will follow you home if you walk the streets till morning.', 'Do you know that person', 'That gentleman, sir? no, sir, I do not, sir.', 'Here, you sir, do you know THAT person', 'Name, sir? No, sir.', 'Then you  said Sir Mulberry, throwing Nicholas and when you have made yourself master of it, put that piece of pasteboard in the fire--do you hear me?', 'Don', 'Will you make yourself known to me?', 'No, No.', 'If you trust to your horse  said Nicholas. ', 'You shall be horsewhipped if you do,', 'You are a villain,', 'You are an errand-boy for aught I know,', 'I am the son of a country gentleman, your equal in birth and education, and your superior I trust in everything besides. I tell you again, Miss Nickleby is my sister. Will you or will you not answer for your unmanly and brutal conduct?', 'To a proper champion--yes. To you--no, Stand out of the way, dog. William, let go her head.', 'You had better not, He has no command over the horse, mind. You shall not go--you shall not, I swear--till you have told me who you are.', 'Leave go, I tell you!', 'Will you unclasp your hand?', 'Will you tell me who you are?', 'No!', 'No!', 'Don  said Nicholas, hurrying him back into the room. ', 'There is no harm done, beyond what a basin of water can repair.', 'No harm! What have you been doing?', 'What have you been doing?', 'I know all, I have heard a part, and guessed the rest. But before I remove one jot of these stains, I must hear the whole from you. You see I am collected. My resolution is taken. Now, my good friend, speak out; for the time for any palliation or concealment is past, and nothing will avail Ralph Nickleby now.', 'Your dress is torn in several places; you walk lame, and I am sure you are suffering pain, Let me see to your hurts first.', 'I have no hurts to see to, beyond a little soreness and stiffness that will soon pass off, But if I had fractured every limb, and still preserved my senses, you should not bandage one till you had told me what I have the right to know. Come, You had a sister of your own, you told me once, who died before you fell into misfortune. Now think of her, and tell me, Newman.', 'Yes, I will, I will, I', 'Say to Miss Nickleby that her brother is here, and in great haste to see her,', 'My darling girl, How pale you are!', 'I have been so unhappy here, dear brother, so very, very miserable. Do not leave me here, dear Nicholas, or I shall die of a broken heart.', 'I will leave you nowhere, never again, Kate, Tell me that I acted for the best. Tell me that we parted because I feared to bring misfortune on your head; that it was a trial to me no less than to yourself, and that if I did wrong it was in ignorance of the world and unknowingly.', 'Why should I tell you what we know so well? Nicholas--dear Nicholas--how can you give way thus?', 'Nicholas--dear Nicholas--how can you give way thus?', 'It is such bitter reproach to me to know what you have undergone, to see you so much altered, and yet so kind and patient--God! it sets my whole blood on fire again. You must leave here with me directly; you should not have slept here last night, but that I knew all this too late. To whom can I speak, before we drive away?', 'The quarter  said Mr. Wititterly, with the gravity of a man on the right side, ', 'Therefore, the quarter s time to lose. Whatever she brought here I will send for, if you will allow me, in the course of the day.', 'With regard to the trifle of salary that is due, I will I will--owe it to Miss Nickleby.', 'I will I will--owe it to Miss Nickleby.', 'If you please,', 'Why don', 'My dear mother, the time for talking has gone by. There is but one step to take, and that is to cast him off with the scorn and indignation he deserves. Your own honour and good name demand that, after the discovery of his vile proceedings, you should not be beholden to him one hour, even for the shelter of these bare walls.', 'To be sure, he is a brute, a monster; and the walls are very bare, and want painting too, and I have had this ceiling whitewashed at the expense of eighteen-pence, which is a very distressing thing, considering that it is so much gone into your uncle', 'Nor I, nor anybody else,', 'Lord bless my life! To think that that Sir Mulberry Hawk should be such an abandoned wretch as Miss La Creevy says he is, Nicholas, my dear; when I was congratulating myself every day on his being an admirer of our dear Kate s enough to kill one, that it is!', 'Oh I dare say, Miss La Creevy, it  said Mrs. Nickleby, stopping short.  m told your friend Sir Mulberry is a base wretch," they', 'They will laugh no more at us, I take it, Come, mother, there is a coach at the door, and until Monday, at all events, we will return to our old quarters.', 'Come, mother, there is a coach at the door, and until Monday, at all events, we will return to our old quarters.', '--Where everything is ready, and a hearty welcome into the bargain, Now, let me go with you downstairs.', 'Here is the letter for Ralph, and here the key. When you come to me this evening, not a word of last night. Ill news travels fast, and they will know it soon enough. Have you heard if he was much hurt?', 'I will ascertain that myself without loss of time,', 'You had better take some rest, You are fevered and ill.', 'Has the post come in?', 'No.', 'Any other letters?', 'One.', 'What', 'Left with the letter;--a boy brought them--quarter of an hour ago, or less.', 'Your brother', 'You are an old man, and I leave you to the grave. May every recollection of your life cling to your false heart, and cast their darkness on your death-bed.', 'What a demnition long time you have kept me ringing at this confounded old cracked tea-kettle of a bell, every tinkle of which is enough to throw a strong man into blue convulsions, upon my life and soul, oh demmit,', 'I didn', 'Then you are most immensely and outr-i-geously deaf, as deaf as a demnition post.', 'It is most demnebly particular, It is to melt some scraps of dirty paper into bright, shining, chinking, tinkling, demd mint sauce.', 'There is quite a bloom upon your demd countenance, You look quite juvenile and jolly, demmit!', 'We are alone, What do you want with me?', 'Good! What did I want! Yes. Ha, ha! Very good. WHAT did I want. Ha, ha. Oh dem!', 'What DO you want, man?', 'Demnition discount,', 'Money is scarce,', 'Demd scarce, or I shouldn', 'The times are bad, and one scarcely knows whom to trust, I don', 'Two,', 'What is the gross amount?', 'Demd trifling--five-and-seventy.', 'And the dates?', 'Two months, and four.', 'I t for many people--for five-and-twenty pounds,', 'Oh demmit!', 'Why, that leaves you fifty, What would you have? Let me see the names.', 'You are so demd hard, Nickleby,', 'Let me see the names, Well! They are not sure, but they are safe enough. Do you consent to the terms, and will you take the money? I don t.', 'Demmit, Nickleby, can', 'No, I can', 'Oh, you ARE here,', 'Yes, my life and soul, I am, I am here, my soul s ground, picking up the demnition gold and silver.', 'I am here, my soul s ground, picking up the demnition gold and silver.', 'I am ashamed of you,', 'Ashamed--of ME, my joy? It knows it is talking demd charming sweetness, but naughty fibs, It knows it is not ashamed of its own popolorum tibby.', 'Which is entirely attributable, to the gross misconduct and most improper behaviour of Mr. Mantalini.', 'Of me, my essential juice of pineapple!', 'Of you, But I will not allow it. I will not submit to be ruined by the extravagance and profligacy of any man. I call Mr Nickleby to witness the course I intend to pursue with you.', 'Pray don am, Settle it between yourselves, settle it between yourselves.', 'No, but I must beg you as a favour, to hear me give him notice of what it is my fixed intention to do--my fixed intention, sir,', 'Will she call me "Sir"? Me who dote upon her with the demdest ardour! She, who coils her fascinations round me like a pure angelic rattlesnake! It will be all up with my feelings; she will throw me into a demd state.', 'Don  rejoined Madame Mantalini, seating herself, and turning her back upon him.  t consider mine.', 'I do not consider yours, my soul!', 'No,', 'His extravagance, Mr. Nickleby, his extravagance is beyond all bounds.', 'I should scarcely have supposed it,', 'I assure you, Mr. Nickleby, however, that it is, It makes me miserable! I am under constant apprehensions, and in constant difficulty. And even this, is not the worst. He took some papers of value out of my desk this morning without asking my permission.', 'I am obliged, since our late misfortunes, to pay Miss Knag a great deal of money for having her name in the business, and I really cannot afford to encourage him in all his wastefulness. As I have no doubt that he came straight here, Mr Nickleby, to convert the papers I have spoken of, into money, and as you have assisted us very often before, and are very much connected with us in this kind of matters, I wish you to know the determination at which his conduct has compelled me to arrive.', 'I have made up my mind, s countenance, ', 'To do that, my joy?', 'To put him, to put him upon a fixed allowance; and I say that if he has a hundred and twenty pounds a year for his clothes and pocket-money, he may consider himself a very fortunate man.', 'Demnition! s nerves. ', 'A very judicious arrangement, if your husband will keep within it, ma', 'Demmit! s voice,  s was a demd outline. Why is she so excruciatingly beautiful that I cannot be angry with her, even now?', 'You have brought it upon yourself, Alfred,', 'I am a demd villain! I will fill my pockets with change for a sovereign in halfpence and drown myself in the Thames; but I will not be angry with her, even then, for I will put a note in the twopenny-post as I go along, to tell her where the body is. She will be a lovely widow. I shall be a body. Some handsome women will cry; she will laugh demnebly.', 'I will fill my pockets with change for a sovereign in halfpence and drown myself in the Thames; but I will not be angry with her, even then, for I will put a note in the twopenny-post as I go along, to tell her where the body is. She will be a lovely widow. I shall be a body. Some handsome women will cry; she will laugh demnebly.', 'Alfred, you cruel, cruel creature,', 'She calls me cruel--me--me--who for her sake will become a demd, damp, moist, unpleasant body!', 'You know it almost breaks my heart, even to hear you talk of such a thing,', 'Can I live to be mistrusted? Have I cut my heart into a demd extraordinary number of little pieces, and given them all away, one after another, to the same little engrossing demnition captivater, and can I live to be suspected by her? Demmit, no I can', 'Ask Mr. Nickleby whether the sum I have mentioned is not a proper one,', 'I don  replied her disconsolate husband; ', 'But it will come soon enough, all love--bah! that I should use the cant of boys and girls--is fleeting enough; though that which has its sole root in the admiration of a whiskered face like that of yonder baboon, perhaps lasts the longest, as it originates in the greater blindness and is fed by vanity. Meantime the fools bring grist to my mill, so let them live out their day, and the longer it is, the better.', 'If you have nothing more to say, my dear, to Mr. Nickleby, we will take our leaves. I am sure we have detained him much too long already.', 'Demmit! I have, though, Here', 'What do you mean?', 'Don', 'I see by the paper that he was thrown from his cabriolet last night, and severely injured, and that his life is in some danger, but I see nothing extraordinary in that--accidents are not miraculous events, when men live hard, and drive after dinner.', 'Whew! Then don', 'Not unless it was as I have just supposed,', 'Demmit, you amaze me,', 'Don  said Mr. Mantalini, taking Ralph by the button,  t an accident at all, but a demd, furious, manslaughtering attack made upon him by your nephew?', 'What!', 'Demmit, Nickleby, you', 'Go on, Tell me what you mean. What is this story? Who told you? Speak, Do you hear me?', "'Gad, Nickleby, what a demneble fierce old evil genius you are! You", 'Pshaw, It is but manner.', 'It is a demd uncomfortable, private-madhouse-sort of a manner,', 'From Pyke; and a demd, fine, pleasant, gentlemanly dog it is, Demnition pleasant, and a tip-top sawyer.', 'And what said he?', 'That it happened this way--that your nephew met him at a coffeehouse, fell upon him with the most demneble ferocity, followed him to his cab, swore he would ride home with him, if he rode upon the horse s tail; smashed his countenance, which is a demd fine countenance in its natural state; frightened the horse, pitched out Sir Mulberry and himself, and--', 'And was killed? Was he? Is he dead?', 'Ugh, Then he has done nothing. Stay, He broke a leg or an arm, or put his shoulder out, or fractured his collar-bone, or ground a rib or two? His neck was saved for the halter, but he got some painful and slow-healing injury for his trouble? Did he? You must have heard that, at least.', 'No, Unless he was dashed into such little pieces that they blew away, he wasn', 'And what, what was the cause of quarrel?', 'You are the demdest, knowing hand, the cunningest, rummest, superlativest old fox--oh dem!--to pretend now not to know that it was the little bright-eyed niece--the softest, sweetest, prettiest--', 'Alfred!', 'She is always right, and when she says it is time to go, it is time, and go she shall; and when she walks along the streets with her own tulip, the women shall say, with envy, she has got a demd fine husband; and the men shall say with rapture, he has got a demd fine wife; and they shall both be right and neither wrong, upon my life and soul--oh demmit!', 'So, so, this devil is loose again, and thwarting me, as he was born to do, at every turn. He told me once there should be a day of reckoning between us, sooner or later. I', 'Are you at home?', 'No,', 'You re not at home, are you?', 'What does the idiot mean?', 'He has been waiting nearly ever since they first came in, and may have heard your voice--that', 'Who has?', 'Why, this IS a surprise! I should know your face, Mr. Squeers.', 'Ah! and you d it better, sir, if it hadn ve been a-going through. Just lift that little boy off the tall stool in the back-office, and tell him to come in here, will you, my man? Oh, he t he fit to bust out of his clothes, and start the seams, and make the very buttons fly off with his fatness? Here  cried Squeers, turning the boy about, and indenting the plumpest parts of his figure with divers pokes and punches, to the great discomposure of his son and heir.  s firmness, here', 'Oh, he t he fit to bust out of his clothes, and start the seams, and make the very buttons fly off with his fatness? Here  cried Squeers, turning the boy about, and indenting the plumpest parts of his figure with divers pokes and punches, to the great discomposure of his son and heir.  s firmness, here', 'Well, I had him there; but that t had his lunch yet. Why you couldn s had his dinner. Look at them tears, sir, there', 'there', 'He looks well, indeed, But how is Mrs Squeers, and how are you?', 'Mrs. Squeers, sir, is as she always is--a mother to them lads, and a blessing, and a comfort, and a joy to all them as knows her. One of our boys--gorging his-self with vittles, and then turning in; that  said Squeers, heaving a sigh, and nodding his head a great many times, ', 'what a member of society that woman is!', 'Have you quite recovered that scoundrel', 'I ve done it now, I was one blessed bruise, sir, from HERE to THERE. Vinegar and brown paper, vinegar and brown paper, from morning to night. I suppose there was a matter of half a ream of brown paper stuck upon me, from first to last. As I laid all of a heap in our kitchen, plastered all over, you might have thought I was a large brown-paper parcel, chock full of nothing but groans. Did I groan loud, Wackford, or did I groan soft?', 'Loud,', 'Was the boys sorry to see me in such a dreadful condition, Wackford, or was they glad?', 'Gl--', 'Eh?', 'Sorry,', 'Oh! Then take your hands out of your pockets, and don re asked a question. Hold your noise, sir, in a gentleman ll run away from my family and never come back any more; and then what would become of all them precious and forlorn lads as would be let loose on the world, without their best friend at their elbers?', 'Were you obliged to have medical attendance?', 'Ay, was I, and a precious bill the medical attendant brought in too; but I paid it though.', 'Yes, I paid it, every farthing, I wasn', 'No!', 'Not a halfpenny, The fact is, we have only one extra with our boys, and that is for doctors when required--and not then, unless we', 'I understand,', 'Very good, Then, after my bill was run up, we picked out five little boys (sons of small tradesmen, as was sure pay) that had never had the scarlet fever, and we sent one to a cottage where they em once all round, and we divided my total among ', 'And a good plan too,', 'I believe you, We always do it. Why, when Mrs Squeers was brought to bed with little Wackford here, we ran the hooping-cough through half-a-dozen boys, and charged her expenses among ', 'em, monthly nurse included. Ha! ha! ha!', 'Some bothering law business, connected with an action, for what they call neglect of a boy. I don', 'connected with an action, for what they call neglect of a boy. I don', 'Grazing, When a boy gets weak and ill and don s turnip field, or sometimes, if it t better land in the country than this perwerse lad grazed on, and yet he goes and catches cold and indigestion and what not, and then his friends brings a lawsuit against ME! Now, you  added Squeers, moving in his chair with the impatience of an ill-used man,  s ingratitude would carry them quite as far as that; would you?', 'A hard case, indeed,', 'You don  replied Squeers.  t suppose there s youth to the amount of eight hundred pound a year at Dotheboys Hall at this present time. I em, and be as fond of every individual twenty pound among ', 'I don s a man going, as possesses the fondness for youth that I do. There d take sixteen hundred pound worth if I could get  em as nothing should equal it!', 'Are you stopping at your old quarters?', 'Yes, we are at the Saracen, and as it don ve collected the money, and some new boys too, I hope. I s a miracle of high feeding, that boy is!', 'I should like to have a word with you,', 'As many words as you like, sir, Wackford, you go and play in the back office, and don ll get thin, and that won t got such a thing as twopence, Mr Nickleby, have you?', 'I--think I have,', 'Thankee, Here! You go and buy a tart--Mr. Nickleby  added Squeers, closing the door on Master Wackford, ', 'makes his flesh shine a good deal, and parents thinks that a healthy sign.', 'Attend to me,', 'I am not to suppose, that you are dolt enough to forgive or forget, very readily, the violence that was committed upon you, or the exposure which accompanied it?', 'Devil a bit,', 'Or to lose an opportunity of repaying it with interest, if you could get one?', 'Show me one, and try,', 'Some such object it was, that induced you to call on me?', 'N-n-no, I don  replied Squeers. ', 'Ah! You needn', 'Who is this boy that he took with him?', 'Was he young or old, healthy or sickly, tractable or rebellious? Speak out, man,', 'Why, he wasn  answered Squeers; ', 'That is, he was not a boy at all, I suppose?', 'Well, he might have been nigh twenty. He wouldn t know him, for he was a little wanting here, nobody at home, you know, if you knocked ever so often.', 'And you DID knock pretty often, I dare say?', 'Pretty well,', 'When you wrote to acknowledge the receipt of this trifle of money as you call it, you told me his friends had deserted him long ago, and that you had not the faintest clue or trace to tell you who he was. Is that the truth?', 'It is, worse luck! It', 'What more do you know about him?', 'Devilish little, I  replied Squeers. ', 'Charity?', 'Charity, to be sure, and when he begins to be useful in a certain sort of way, this young scoundrel of a Nickleby comes and carries him off. But the most vexatious and aggeravating part of the whole affair is, that some questions have been asked about him at last--not of me, but, in a roundabout kind of way, of people in our village. So, that just when I might have had all arrears paid up, perhaps, and perhaps--who knows? such things have happened in our business before--a present besides for putting him out to a farmer, or sending him to sea, so that he might never turn up to disgrace his parents, supposing him to be a natural boy, as many of our boys are--damme, if that villain of a Nickleby don', 'We will both cry quits with him before long,', 'Quits! Ah! and I should like to leave a small balance in his favour, to be settled when he can. I only wish Mrs. Squeers could catch hold of him. Bless her heart! She', 'We will talk of this again, I must have time to think of it. To wound him through his own affections and fancies--. If I could strike him through this boy--', 'Strike him how you like, sir, only hit him hard enough, that ll say good-morning. Here!--just chuck that little boy', 'He t he?', 'Very,', 'Pretty well swelled out, an  pursued Squeers. ', 'Ah! he has;--the fatness of twenty!--more! He', 'he has;--the fatness of twenty!--more! He', 'Why, what does the man mean? Is he drunk?', 'Is he mad?', 'When my brother was such as he, the first comparisons were drawn between us--always in my disfavour. HE was open, liberal, gallant, gay; I a crafty hunks of cold and stagnant blood, with no passion but love of saving, and no spirit beyond a thirst for gain. I recollected it well when I first saw this whipster; but I remember it better now.', 'Recollections like these, flock upon me--when I resign myself to them--in crowds, and from countless quarters. As a portion of the world affect to despise the power of money, I must try and show them what it is.', 'As he will be one of our own little household, wherever we live, or whatever fortune is in reserve for us, I must present the poor fellow in due form. They will be kind to him for his own sake, and if not (on that account solely) to the full extent I could wish, they will stretch a point, I am sure, for mine.', 'However, she cannot fail to become attached to him, when she knows what a devoted creature he is, and as she must quickly make the discovery, his probation will be a short one.', 'she cannot fail to become attached to him, when she knows what a devoted creature he is, and as she must quickly make the discovery, his probation will be a short one.', 'I was afraid, that you had fallen into some fresh trouble; the time seemed so long, at last, that I almost feared you were lost.', 'Lost! You will not be rid of me so easily, I promise you. I shall rise to the surface many thousand times yet, and the harder the thrust that pushes me down, the more quickly I shall rebound, Smike. But come; my errand here is to take you home.', 'Home!', 'Ay, Why not?', 'I had such hopes once, day and night, day and night, for many years. I longed for home till I was weary, and pined away with grief, but now--', 'And what now? What now, old friend?', 'I could not part from you to go to any home on earth, except one, except one. I shall never be an old man; and if your hand placed me in the grave, and I could think, before I died, that you would come and look upon it sometimes with one of your kind smiles, and in the summer weather, when everything was alive--not dead like me--I could go to that home almost without a tear.', 'Why do you talk thus, poor boy, if your life is a happy one with me?', 'Because I should change; not those about me. And if they forgot me, I should never know it, In the churchyard we are all alike, but here there are none like me. I am a poor creature, but I know that.', 'You are a foolish, silly creature, If that is what you mean, I grant you that. Why, here  company!--my pretty sister too, whom you have so often asked me about. Is this your Yorkshire gallantry? For shame! for shame!', 'When I talk of home, I talk of mine--which is yours of course. If it were defined by any particular four walls and a roof, God knows I should be sufficiently puzzled to say whereabouts it lay; but that is not what I mean. When I speak of home, I speak of the place where--in default of a better--those I love are gathered together; and if that place were a gypsy', 'And this, Kate, is the faithful friend and affectionate fellow-traveller whom I prepared you to receive.', 'You are always kind-hearted, and anxious to help the oppressed, my dear mother, so you will be favourably disposed towards him, I know.', 'I am sure, my dear Nicholas, I am sure any friend of yours has, as indeed he naturally ought to have, and must have, of course, you know, a great claim upon me, and of course, it is a very great pleasure to me to be introduced to anybody you take an interest in. There can be no doubt about that; none at all; not the least in the world, At the same time I must say, Nicholas, my dear, as I used to say to your poor dear papa, when he WOULD bring gentlemen home to dinner, and there was nothing in the house, that if he had come the day before yesterday--no, I don', 'Because, if he is, Kate, my dear, I don s possible for him to sleep anywhere, and that', 'La, Kate, my dear, how you do tickle one! Of course, I understand THAT, my love, without your telling me; and I said the same to Nicholas, and I AM very much pleased. You didn  added Mrs. Nickleby, turning round with an air of less reserve than she had before assumed,  s name is.', 'His name, mother, is Smike.', 'What is the matter?', 'It  cried Mrs. Nickleby;  t speak to me--I shall be better presently.', 'It  said Mrs. Nickleby,  t be blamed for it. Your grandmama, Kate, was exactly the same--precisely. The least excitement, the slightest surprise--she fainted away directly. I have heard her say, often and often, that when she was a young lady, and before she was married, she was turning a corner into Oxford Street one day, when she ran against her own hairdresser, who, it seems, was escaping from a bear;--the mere suddenness of the encounter made her faint away directly. Wait, though, Let me be sure I s? I declare I can', 'Mr. Smike is from Yorkshire, Nicholas, my dear?', 'Certainly, mother, I see you have not forgotten his melancholy history.', 'O dear no, Ah! melancholy, indeed. You don  said the good lady, addressing herself to him. ', 'My dear mother, do you suppose that the unfortunate outcast of a Yorkshire school was likely to receive many cards of invitation from the nobility and gentry in the neighbourhood?', 'Really, my dear, I don  said Mrs. Nickleby.  s not so very unlikely, after all.', 'I must try something else.', 'No offence. Oh no offence!', 'A great many opportunities here, sir,', 'A great many people willing and anxious to be employed have seriously thought so very often, I dare say, Poor fellows, poor fellows!', 'You were about to speak, young gentleman; what were you going to say?', 'Merely that I almost hoped--I mean to say, thought--you had some object in consulting those advertisements,', 'Ay, ay? what object now--what object? Did you think I wanted a situation now--eh? Did you think I did?', 'Ha! ha! A very natural thought, at all events, after seeing me gazing at those bills. I thought the same of you, at first; upon my word I did.', 'If you had thought so at last, too, sir, you would not have been far from the truth,', 'Eh? What! Dear me! No, no. Well-behaved young gentleman reduced to such a necessity! No no, no no.', 'Stay, What d', 'Merely that your kind face and manner--both so unlike any I have ever seen--tempted me into an avowal, which, to any other stranger in this wilderness of London, I should not have dreamt of making,', 'Wilderness! Yes, it is, it is. Good! It IS a wilderness, It was a wilderness to me once. I came here barefoot. I have never forgotten it. Thank God!', 'What  said the old man, laying his hand on the shoulder of Nicholas, and walking him up the street.  re--Eh? Who', 'Who', 'My father,', 'Ah! Bad thing for a young man to lose his father. Widowed mother, perhaps?', 'Brothers and sisters too? Eh?', 'One sister,', 'Poor thing, poor thing! You are a scholar too, I dare say?', 'I have been tolerably well educated,', 'Fine thing, education a great thing: a very great thing! I never had any. I admire it the more in others. A very fine thing. Yes, yes. Tell me more of your history. Let me hear it all. No impertinent curiosity--no, no, no.', 'Don  said he.  t lose a minute.', 'Don', 'Is my brother in his room, Tim?', 'Yes, he is, sir, but Mr. Trimmers is with him.', 'Ay! And what has he come about, Tim?', 'He is getting up a subscription for the widow and family of a man who was killed in the East India Docks this morning, sir, Smashed, sir, by a cask of sugar.', 'Smashed, sir, by a cask of sugar.', 'He is a good creature, He is a kind soul. I am very much obliged to Trimmers. Trimmers is one of the best friends we have. He makes a thousand cases known to us that we should never discover of ourselves. I am VERY much obliged to Trimmers.', 'I owe you a thousand thanks, Trimmers, ten thousand thanks. I take it very friendly of you, very friendly indeed, How many children are there, and what has my brother Ned given, Trimmers?', 'There are six children, and your brother has given us twenty pounds.', 'My brother Ned is a good fellow, and you  said the old man, shaking him by both hands with trembling eagerness.  t look ostentatious; put me down ten pound, and Tim Linkinwater ten pound. A cheque for twenty pound for Mr. Trimmers, Tim. God bless you, Trimmers--and come and dine with us some day this week; you', 'Brother Ned, are you busy, my dear brother, or can you spare time for a word or two with me?', 'Brother Charles, my dear fellow, don', 'Brother Ned, s friend, closing the room-door, ', 'It is enough, my dear brother, that you say we should, When you say that, no further inquiries are needed. He SHALL be assisted. What are his necessities, and what does he require? Where is Tim Linkinwater? Let us have him here.', 'Where is Tim Linkinwater?', 'Stop, stop, stop! I ve a plan. Tim is getting old, and Tim has been a faithful servant, brother Ned; and I don s mother and sister, and buying a little tomb for the family when his poor brother died, was a sufficient recompense for his faithful services.', 'No, no, no, Certainly not. Not half enough, not half.', 'If we could lighten Tim  said the old gentleman,  s three good years our senior now. Old Tim Linkinwater young again! Eh, brother Ned, eh? Why, I recollect old Tim Linkinwater quite a little boy, don', 'But hear this first--hear this first, brother Ned, I t feel it right that he should tell us his story over and over again as if he was a beggar, or as if we doubted him. No, no no.', 'No, no, no, Very right, my dear brother, very right.', 'He will tell me I  said Nicholas But whether I do or not, you', 'Tim, you understand that we have an intention of taking this young gentleman into the counting-house?', 'I  said Tim, breaking out all at once, and looking very resolute.  m not going to sleep in the fresh air; no, nor I', 'Damn your obstinacy, Tim Linkinwater, Damn your obstinacy, Tim Linkinwater, what do you mean, sir?', 'It  said Tim, making a calculation in the air with his pen, and drawing an imaginary line before he cast it up,  ve opened the safe every morning all that time (Sundays excepted) as the clock struck nine, and gone over the house every night at half-past ten (except on Foreign Post nights, and then twenty minutes before twelve) to see the doors fastened, and the fires out. I s the same mignonette box in the middle of the window, and the same four flower-pots, two on each side, that I brought with me when I first came. There an ve said it again and again, and I t such a square as this in the world. I KNOW there an  said Tim, with sudden energy, and looking sternly about him.  t care which--there s not such a spring in England as the pump under the archway. There ve seen it every morning before I shaved, and I ought to know something about it. I have slept in that room, for four-and-forty year; and if it wasn t interfere with business, I should request leave to die there.', 'Damn you, Tim Linkinwater, how dare you talk about dying?', 'That ve got to say, Mr. Edwin and Mr. Charles, This isn ve talked about superannuating me; but, if you please, we', 'He must be done something with, brother Ned, we must disregard his old scruples; they can t submit to it peaceably, we must have recourse to violence.', 'we must disregard his old scruples; they can t submit to it peaceably, we must have recourse to violence.', 'Quite right, quite right, my dear brother. If he won', 'We must. We certainly must have a quarrel with Tim Linkinwater, But in the meantime, my dear brother, we are keeping our young friend; and the poor lady and her daughter will be anxious for his return. So let us say goodbye for the present, and--there, there--take care of that box, my dear sir--and--no, no, not a word now; but be careful of the crossings and--', 'And I think, my dear brother, s first friend, ', 'For nothing at all, We are rich, and should be ashamed to touch the rent under such circumstances as these. Where is Tim Linkinwater?--for nothing at all, my dear brother, for nothing at all.', 'Perhaps it would be better to say something, brother Ned, it would help to preserve habits of frugality, you know, and remove any painful sense of overwhelming obligations. We might say fifteen pound, or twenty pound, and if it was punctually paid, make it up to them in some other way. And I might secretly advance a small loan towards a little furniture, and you might secretly advance another small loan, brother Ned; and if we find them doing well--as we shall; there', 'I  said Mr. Kenwigs, arranging his shirt-collar, and walking slowly upstairs,  s a boy, I won', 'It', 'You consider him a fine boy, do you, sir?', 'It  said the doctor. ', 'I ne--ver saw such a baby,', 'Morleena was a fine baby,', 'They were all fine babies,', 'She will be a treasure to the man she marries, sir, I think she', 'I shouldn', 'You never see her dance, sir, did you?', 'Ay! then you don s capable of.', 'Well, Mr. Kenwigs, this makes six. You', 'I think six is almost enough, sir,', 'Pooh! pooh! Nonsense! not half enough.', 'They  said Mr. Kenwigs, taking his second daughter on his knee; ', 'Oh, indeed!', 'And very good ones too, I believe, haven', 'Why, ma  said Mr. Kenwigs,  s not exactly for me to say what they may be, or what they may not be. It s is--I should say, that my children might come into a matter of a hundred pound apiece, perhaps. Perhaps more, but certainly that.', 'And a very pretty little fortune,', 'There are some relations of Mrs. Kenwigs  said Mr. Kenwigs, taking a pinch of snuff from the doctor t used to it, ', 'Ah! I know who you mean,', 'I made mention of no names, and I wish to make mention of no names, Many of my friends have met a relation of Mrs. Kenwigs s all.', 'I', 'It  pursued Mr Kenwigs.  s naterally very gratifying to my feelings as a man, to know that man. It will be naterally very gratifying to my feelings as a husband, to make that man acquainted with this ewent.', 'That girl grows more like her mother every day,', 'There! What I always say; what I always did say! She', 'Yes! there is a likeness, But such a woman as Mrs. Kenwigs was, afore she was married! Good gracious, such a woman!', 'Talk of fairies! I never see anybody so light to be alive, never. Such manners too; so playful, and yet so sewerely proper! As for her figure! It isn  said Mr. Kenwigs, dropping his voice; ', 'But only see what it is now, Does SHE look like the mother of six?', 'Quite ridiculous,', 'She looks a deal more like her own daughter,', 'So she does, A great deal more.', 'Why, I do declare, it', 'I ought to make a hundred apologies to you for calling at such a season, but I was not aware of it until I had rung the bell, and my time is so fully occupied now, that I feared it might be some days before I could possibly come again.', 'No time like the present, sir, The sitiwation of Mrs Kenwigs, sir, is no obstacle to a little conversation between you and me, I hope?', 'You are very good,', 'The fact is, that before I left the country, where I have been for some time past, I undertook to deliver a message to you.', 'Ay, ay?', 'And I have been, already in town for some days, without having had an opportunity of doing so.', 'It  said Mr. Kenwigs.  s none the worse for keeping cold. Message from the country! that t know anybody in the country.', 'Miss Petowker,', 'Oh! from her, is it? Oh dear, yes. Ah! Mrs. Kenwigs will be glad to hear from her. Henrietta Petowker, eh? How odd things come about, now! That you should have met her in the country! Well!', 'The message relates to family matters,', 'Oh, never mind, All friends here.', 'At Portsmouth, Henrietta Petowker is,', 'Yes, Mr. Lillyvick is there.', 'The message is from him,', 'He desired me to give his kindest love,', 'Very much obliged to him, I', 'His kindest love, and to say that he had no time to write, but that he was married to Miss Petowker.', 'My children, my defrauded, swindled infants! Villain, ass, traitor!', 'Drat the man! What does he mean by making that noise here?', 'Silence, woman!', 'I won  returned the nurse. ', 'No!', 'More shame for you, Ugh! you unnatural monster.', 'Let him die, Let him die! He has no expectations, no property to come into. We want no babies here, Take  em away to the Fondling!', 'The attention, the attention that I', 'the attention that I', 'It  said one of the married ladies; ', 'Oh yes, and what she  cried a great many voices.  s a good man, do.', 'The presents that have been made to him, the pipes, the snuff-boxes--a pair of india-rubber goloshes, that cost six-and-six--', 'Ah! it won  cried the matrons generally;  ll all come home to him, never fear.', 'but it', 'Four-and-forty year, next May! Many new ledgers since then. Four-and-forty year!', 'Come, come, I am all impatience to begin.', 'He has done it! His capital B s are exactly like mine; he dots all his small i t such a young man as this in all London, not one. Don t produce his equal. I challenge the city to do it!', 'Well said, Tim--well said, Tim Linkinwater! I knew our young friend would take great pains, and I was quite certain he would succeed, in no time. Didn', 'You did, my dear brother; certainly, my dear brother, you said so, and you were quite right, Quite right. Tim Linkinwater is excited, but he is justly excited, properly excited. Tim is a fine fellow. Tim Linkinwater, sir--you', 'Here  said Tim, wholly regardless of this address to himself, and raising his spectacles from the ledger to the brothers.  s a pleasant thing. Do you suppose I haven t often thought that things might go on irregular and untidy here, after I was taken away? But now, now, when I m satisfied. The business will go on, when I', 'Tim Linkinwater, sir, give me your hand, sir. This is your birthday. How dare you talk about anything else till you have been wished many happy returns of the day, Tim Linkinwater? God bless you, Tim! God bless you!', 'My dear brother, s disengaged fist, ', 'Brother Ned, my dear boy, I believe that Tim Linkinwater was born a hundred and fifty years old, and is gradually coming down to five-and-twenty; for he', 'So he is, brother Charles, so he is, There', 'Remember, Tim, that we dine at half-past five today instead of two o t open it until you go to bed, and never say another word upon the subject, or I m ready. At half-past five, remember, Mr. Nickleby! Tim Linkinwater, sir, take care of Mr. Nickleby at half-past five. Now, brother Ned.', 'For these and all other blessings, brother Charles,', 'Lord, make us truly thankful, brother Ned,', 'Brother Charles, my dear fellow, there is another association connected with this day which must never be forgotten, and never can be forgotten, by you and me. This day, which brought into the world a most faithful and excellent and exemplary fellow, took from it the kindest and very best of parents, the very best of parents to us both. I wish that she could have seen us in our prosperity, and shared it, and had the happiness of knowing how dearly we loved her in it, as we did when we were two poor boys; but that was not to be. My dear brother--The Memory of our Mother.', 'Good Lord! and there are scores of people of their own station, knowing all this, and twenty thousand times more, who wouldn', 'David,', 'Sir,', 'A magnum of the double-diamond, David, to drink the health of Mr Linkinwater.', 'Ha! this looks well, David.', 'It ought to, sir, You', 'Nay, David, nay,', 'I wrote the entry in the cellar-book myself, sir, if you please, Mr. Linkinwater had only been here twenty year, sir, when that pipe of double-diamond was laid down.', 'David is quite right, quite right, brother Charles, are the people here, David?', 'Outside the door, sir,', 'Show  em in.', 'Seven, and David, eight. There! Now, you', 'We lemen, and if you please we s thanking of ', 'A most biddable creature he is, to be sure, I know you t like to do this before a third person; indeed, before a young man it would not be quite proper, though really, after all, I don s not a very becoming thing, though some people say it is very much so, and really I don s well got up, and the borders are small-plaited; of course, a good deal depends upon that.', 'People may say what they like, but there m sure you would confess, Nicholas my dear, if you would only have strings to yours, and wear it like a Christian, instead of sticking it upon the very top of your head like a blue-coat boy. You needn s-his-name, who used to read prayers in that old church with the curious little steeple that the weathercock was blown off the night week before you were born,--I have often heard them say, that the young men at college are uncommonly particular about their nightcaps, and that the Oxford nightcaps are quite celebrated for their strength and goodness; so much so, indeed, that the young men never dream of going to bed without  s admitted on all hands that THEY know what t coddle themselves.', 'Late as it is, I am almost selfish enough to wish that Kate had been up to hear all this. I was all impatience, as I came along, to tell her.', 'Why, Kate, Kate has been in bed--oh! a couple of hours--and I s a very delightful and consoling thing to have a grown-up son that one can put confidence in, and advise with; indeed I don', 'There was a lady in our neighbourhood, speaking of sons puts me in mind of it--a lady in our neighbourhood when we lived near Dawlish, I think her name was Rogers; indeed I am sure it was if it wasn', 'Is it about her, mother, that you wished to speak to me?', 'About HER! Good gracious, Nicholas, my dear, how CAN you be so ridiculous! But that was always the way with your poor dear papa,--just his way--always wandering, never able to fix his thoughts on any one subject for two minutes together. I think I see him now! looking at me while I was talking to him about his affairs, just as if his ideas were in a state of perfect conglomeration! Anybody who had come in upon us suddenly, would have supposed I was confusing and distracting him instead of making things plainer; upon my word they would.', 'I am very sorry, mother, that I should inherit this unfortunate slowness of apprehension, but I ll only go straight on: indeed I will.', 'Your poor pa! He never knew, till it was too late, what I would have had him do!', 'However, this has nothing to do--certainly nothing whatever to do--with the gentleman in the next house.', 'I should suppose that the gentleman in the next house has as little to do with us,', 'There can be no doubt, that he IS a gentleman, and has the manners of a gentleman, and the appearance of a gentleman, although he does wear smalls and grey worsted stockings. That may be eccentricity, or he may be proud of his legs. I don t be. The Prince Regent was proud of his legs, and so was Daniel Lambert, who was also a fat man; HE was proud of his legs. So was Miss Biffin: she was--no, I think she had only toes, but the principle is the same.', 'You may well be surprised, Nicholas, my dear, I am sure I was. It came upon me like a flash of fire, and almost froze my blood. The bottom of his garden joins the bottom of ours, and of course I had several times seen him sitting among the scarlet-beans in his little arbour, or working at his little hot-beds. I used to think he stared rather, but I didn', 'To throw his cucumbers over our wall!', 'Yes, Nicholas, my dear, his cucumbers over our wall. And vegetable marrows likewise.', 'his cucumbers over our wall. And vegetable marrows likewise.', 'Confound his impudence! What does he mean by that?', 'I don', 'What! cucumbers and vegetable marrows flying at the heads of the family as they walk in their own garden, and not meant impertinently! Why, mother--', 'He must be a very weak, and foolish, and inconsiderate man, blamable indeed--at least I suppose other people would consider him so; of course I can', 'Surely, mother, such an idea never entered your brain for an instant?', 'Bless my heart, Nicholas my dear, isn  exclaimed Mrs. Nickleby, with a half-simper, ', 'Upon my word, my dear, I don  returned Mrs. Nickleby;  t know. I am sure there was a case in the day before yesterday t shut herself up in an air-tight three-pair-of-stairs, and charcoal herself to death with him; and who went and hid himself in a wood with a sharp-pointed knife, and rushed out, as she was passing by with a few friends, and killed himself first, and then all the friends, and then her--no, killed all the friends first, and then herself, and then HIMself--which it is quite frightful to think of. Somehow or other, they always ARE journeyman shoemakers who do these things in France, according to the papers. I don', 'But this man, who is not a shoemaker--what has he done, mother, what has he said? You know, there is no language of vegetables, which converts a cucumber into a formal declaration of attachment.', 'My dear, he has done and said all sorts of things.', 'Is there no mistake on your part?', 'Mistake! Lord, Nicholas my dear, do you suppose I don s in earnest?', 'Well, well!', 'Every time I go to the window, he kisses one hand, and lays the other upon his heart--of course it ll say it  added Mrs. Nickleby, with increased confusion,  t listen to it. Then, the question is, Nicholas my dear, what am I to do?', 'Does Kate know of this?', 'I have not said a word about it yet,', 'Then, for Heaven  rejoined Nicholas, rising,  s memory, would prompt. There are a thousand ways in which you can show your dislike of these preposterous and doting attentions. If you act as decidedly as you ought and they are still continued, and to your annoyance, I can speedily put a stop to them. But I should not interfere in a matter so ridiculous, and attach importance to it, until you have vindicated yourself. Most women can do that, but especially one of your age and condition, in circumstances like these, which are unworthy of a serious thought. I would not shame you by seeming to take them to heart, or treat them earnestly for an instant. Absurd old idiot!', 'As to its being preposterous, and doting, and ridiculous, I don s hopeless on his part, certainly; but why he should be an absurd old idiot, I confess I don s hopeless. Poor fellow! He is to be pitied, I think!', 'It  murmured Mrs. Nickleby, peering into the garden,  s another large vegetable marrow sticking, at this moment, on the broken glass bottles at the top of the wall!', 'Which I declare I haven  said Miss La Creevy; ', 'You never bestowed one thought upon yourself, I believe,', 'Upon my word, my dear, when there are so many pleasanter things to think of, I should be a goose if I did, By-the-bye, I HAVE thought of somebody too. Do you know, that I observe a great change in one of this family--a very extraordinary change?', 'By-the-bye, I HAVE thought of somebody too. Do you know, that I observe a great change in one of this family--a very extraordinary change?', 'In whom? Not in--', 'Not in your brother, my dear, for he is always the same affectionate good-natured clever creature, with a spice of the--I won s any occasion, that he was when I first knew you. No. Smike, as he WILL be called, poor fellow! for he won', 'How? Not in health?', 'N--n--o; perhaps not in health exactly, although he is a worn and feeble creature, and has that in his face which it would wring my heart to see in yours. No; not in health.', 'How then?', 'I scarcely know, But I have watched him, and he has brought the tears into my eyes many times. It is not a very difficult matter to do that, certainly, for I am easily melted; still I think these came with good cause and reason. I am sure that since he has been here, he has grown, from some strong cause, more conscious of his weak intellect. He feels it more. It gives him greater pain to know that he wanders sometimes, and cannot understand very simple things. I have watched him when you have not been by, my dear, sit brooding by himself, with such a look of pain as I could scarcely bear to see, and then get up and leave the room: so sorrowfully, and in such dejection, that I cannot tell you how it has hurt me. Not three weeks ago, he was a light-hearted busy creature, overjoyed to be in a bustle, and as happy as the day was long. Now, he is another being--the same willing, harmless, faithful, loving creature--but the same in nothing else.', 'Surely this will all pass off, Poor fellow!', 'I hope, it may. I hope, for the sake of that poor lad, it may. However, I have said my say, and a very long say it is, and a very wrong say too, I shouldn t know, except the miniatures: and he is a clever thief who can dispose of them to any great advantage, for I can s the honest truth.', 'Curse those hounds! will nothing stop their infernal throats?', 'Damn! Isn s the time?', 'Half-past eight,', 'Here, draw the table nearer, and let us have the cards again, More piquet. Come.', 'Better,', 'Mr. Nickleby wishes to know, sir--', 'I tell you, better,', 'It IS inconvenient. I can t see anybody, You know that, you blockhead.', 'I am very sorry, sir, But Mr. Nickleby pressed so much, sir--', 'Did he say whether he had any business to speak about?', 'No, sir. He said he wished to see you, sir. Particularly, Mr. Nickleby said, sir.', 'Tell him to come up. Here, move that lamp, and put it on the stand behind me. Wheel that table away, and place a chair there--further off. Leave it so.', 'Well, Nickleby, I have had a bad accident, you see.', 'I see, Bad, indeed! I should not have known you, Sir Mulberry. Dear, dear! This IS bad.', 'Sit down, Am I a sight, that you stand gazing there?', 'I have inquired at the door, Sir Mulberry, every day, twice a day, indeed, at first--and tonight, presuming upon old acquaintance, and past transactions by which we have mutually benefited in some degree, I could not resist soliciting admission to your chamber. Have you--have you suffered much?', 'twice a day, indeed, at first--and tonight, presuming upon old acquaintance, and past transactions by which we have mutually benefited in some degree, I could not resist soliciting admission to your chamber. Have you--have you suffered much?', 'More than enough to please me, and less than enough to please some broken-down hacks that you and I know of, and who lay their ruin between us, I dare say,', 'And what is it in these "past transactions," that brought you here tonight?', 'Nothing, There are some bills of my lord  said Ralph, speaking more slowly, and with harsher emphasis, ', 'Punishment!', 'I know it has been a severe one, and that has made me the more anxious to tell you that I disown this vagabond--that I acknowledge him as no kin of mine--and that I leave him to take his deserts from you, and every man besides. You may wring his neck if you please. I shall not interfere.', 'This story that they tell me here, has got abroad then, has it?', 'Noised in all directions, Every club and gaming-room has rung with it. There has been a good song made about it, as I am told, I have not heard it myself, not being in the way of such things, but I have been told it s all over town, of course.', 'It  said Sir Mulberry;  s all a lie. The mare took fright.', 'They SAY he frightened her, Some say he frightened you, but THAT t hear folks tell that of you. No, no.', 'When I am off this cursed bed, I ll put a mark on him that he shall carry to his grave. I ll do more than that; I', 'It is a galling thing, to think that the man about town, the rake, the ROUE, the rook of twenty seasons should be brought to this pass by a mere boy!', 'A raw, slight stripling, against a man whose very weight might crush him; to say nothing of his skill in--I am right, I think, you WERE a patron of the ring once, were you not?', 'Ha! I thought so. That was before I knew you, but I was pretty sure I couldn', 'He  said Sir Mulberry Hawk, ', 'Oh! he doesn  said Ralph, his face darkening, and his own hatred getting the upper hand of him, for the first time, as this gay picture of Nicholas presented itself;  d give good money to have him stabbed to the heart and rolled into the kennel for the dogs to tear.', 'Why what in the deyvle  said the young man. ', 'Sir Mulberry has been angry, my Lord,', 'Not about money, I hope? Nothing has gone wrong in business, has it, Nickleby?', 'No, my Lord, no, On that point we always agree. Sir Mulberry has been calling to mind the cause of--', 'Mind that, Hawk! I never will be a party to, or permit, if I can help it, a cowardly attack upon this young fellow.', 'Cowardly!', 'Ye-es, If you had told him who you were; if you had given him your card, and found out, afterwards, that his station or character prevented your fighting him, it would have been bad enough then; upon my soul it would have been bad enough then. As it is, you did wrong. I did wrong too, not to interfere, and I am sorry for it. What happened to you afterwards, was as much the consequence of accident as design, and more your fault than his; and it shall not, with my knowledge, be cruelly visited upon him, it shall not indeed.', 'I do believe, now; upon my honour I do believe, that the sister is as virtuous and modest a young lady as she is a handsome one; and of the brother, I say this, that he acted as her brother should, and in a manly and spirited manner. And I only wish, with all my heart and soul, that any one of us came out of this matter half as well as he does.', 'Is this your pupil? or has he come fresh from some country parson?', 'Green fools take these fits sometimes, Leave him to me.', 'Here he is, father! Hooray!', 'Here  cried Mr. Squeers, gradually coming hand-over-hand down the umbrella, and only unhooking it when he had got tight hold of the victim Here', 'A coach, father!', 'Yes, a coach, sir, Damn the expense. Let', 'What', 'Everything! Everything--running away, sir--joining in bloodthirsty attacks upon his master--there s bad that he hasn', 'It isn  said Squeers.  s real flesh and blood! I know the feel of it!', 'Your mother will be fit to jump out of her skin, my boy, when she hears of this,', 'Oh, won', 'To think, that you and me should be turning out of a street, and come upon him at the very nick; and that I should have him tight, at only one cast of the umbrella, as if I had hooked him with a grappling-iron! Ha, ha!', 'Didn', 'You did; like a good   said Mr. Squeers, patting his son and you shall have the best button-over jacket and waistcoat that the next new boy brings down, as a reward of merit. Mind that. You always keep on in the same path, and do them things that you see your father do, and when you die you', 'I must go home,', 'To be sure you must. You  replied Mr. Squeers.  ll go home very soon, you will. You s time, my young friend; and the next time you get away from there, I give you leave to keep away. Where', 'You ll find yourself at the peaceful village of Dotheboys, in Yorkshire, in something under a week s the clothes you run off in, you ungrateful robber?', 'Do you know that I could hang you up, outside of the Old Bailey, for making away with them articles of property? Do you know that it t quite certain whether it an ards of the valley of five pound from a dwelling-house? Eh? Do you know that? What do you suppose was the worth of them clothes you had? Do you know that that Wellington boot you wore, cost eight-and-twenty shillings when it was a pair, and the shoe seven-and-six? But you came to the right shop for mercy when you came to me, and thank your stars that it IS me as has got to serve you with the article.', 'I never threshed a boy in a hackney coach before, There', 'What are you pulling a man', 'That  replied Squeers.  s brass plate on the door, with the name of Snawley.', 'Couldn s limbs off his body?', 'No! Say another word, and I', 'Here we are! Here', 'What! The boy that run away!', 'The very boy s nose, and drawing it away again, and repeating the process several times, with a vicious aspect.  t a lady present, I ll owe it him.', 'It', 'Providence is against him, no doubt, Of course; that was to be expected. Anybody might have known that.', 'Hard-heartedness and evil-doing will never prosper, sir,', 'Never was such a thing known,', 'I have been, Mr. Snawley, I have been that chap s classical, commercial, mathematical, philosophical, and trigonomical friend. My son--my only son, Wackford--has been his brother; Mrs. Squeers has been his mother, grandmother, aunt,--ah! and I may say uncle too, all in one. She never cottoned to anybody, except them two engaging and delightful boys of yours, as she cottoned to this chap. What s come of my milk of human kindness? It turns into curds and whey when I look at him.', 'Well it may, sir, Oh! Well it may, sir.', 'Where has he been all this time? Has he been living with--?', 'Ah, sir! Have you been a living with that there devilish Nickleby, sir?', 'See there, lass! There be Paul Ecod, he be a soizable ', 'Goodness, John! I shouldn', 'Monsther!--Ye  said the countryman good-humouredly, as he came slowly down in his huge top-coat;  at dost thee tak yon place to be noo--thot ? Ye gin you thried for twolve moonths. It  but a Poast Office! Ho! ho! They need to charge for dooble-latthers. A Poast Office! Wa  thot?  s on d loike to see where the Lord Mayor o', 'and wa un owor the wa d never coom near it  s na at dost thee think o Ecod, if thot y a Poast Office, I  Lunnun lives.', 'Weel! Dang my bootuns if she bean', 'She  replied John Browdie and I was very sorry when she woke, for she has been SO cross!', 'Hollo! Coom, wakken oop, will ', 'Oh,   cried Miss Squeers, ', 'Well, I do like that, when you have had nearly the whole coach to yourself.', 'Don Tilda, because you have, and it t. You mightn Tilda, but I haven', 'Noo, gang to the Sarah', 'To the VERE?', 'Lawk, Mr. Browdie! The idea! Saracen', 'Sure-ly, I know s Son', 'Oh, ah! I know that,', "'Tilda, dear, really, we shall be taken for I don", 'Let them tak  said John Browdie;  t come to Lunnun to do nought but ', 'I hope not, Mr. Browdie,', 'Well, then, it ve only been a married man fower days,   it off. Here be a weddin s-maid, and the groom--if a mun dean joy himsel noo, when ought he, hey? Drat it all, thot', 'Is my pa in, do you know?', 'Beg your pardon, miss?', 'My pa, is he in?', 'In where, miss?', 'In here--in the house! My pa--Mr. Wackford Squeers--he', 'I didn l  replied the waiter. ', 'Ye  said John Browdie.   hond up another pigeon-pie, will   muttered John, looking into the empty dish as the waiter retired;   this a pie--three yoong pigeons and a troifling matther o s in your mooth and when it', 'Why, who', 'Who, indeed, pa! But you see ', 'Tilda IS married at last.', 'And I stond threat for a soight o', 'One of them things that young men do when they get married, and as runs through with their money like nothing at all! How much better wouldn  said Mr. Squeers in a moralising way,  re aware of it; mine did upon me.', 'Will ', 'I won  returned Squeers;  ll just let little Wackford tuck into something fat, I s lot of profit on this sort of vittles without that. If you hear the waiter coming, sir, shove it in your pocket and look out of the window, d', 'I', 'Well, it', 'Oh, I', 'No, Fanny?', 'No,   replied Miss Squeers, shaking her head vehemently. ', 'So can the young men, it seems, Fanny,', 'They an d into it by ME, ', 'No, that', 'What do you think? who do you suppose we have laid hands on, Wackford and me?', 'Pa! not Mr--? Nickleby?', 'No, But next door to him though.', 'You can', 'Yes, I can though, I', 'Wa  exclaimed John Browdie, pushing away his plate.  d scoondrel? Where?', 'Why, in the top back room, at my lodging, with him on one side, and the key on the other.', 'At thy loodgin st gotten him at thy loodgin m darned but I must shak thee by the hond for thot.--Gotten him at thy loodgin', 'Yes, thankee. Don s not so bad, is it?', 'Ba  repeated John Browdie.  s eneaf to scare a mun to hear tell on.', 'I thought it would surprise you a bit, It was pretty neatly done, and pretty quick too.', 'Hoo wor it? Tell us all aboot it, mun; coom, quick!', 'For fear he should give me the slip, by any chance, I t you see? So it d have missed us; and as it is, unless you could come and tea with me tonight, we shan', 'Dean  returned the Yorkshireman, shaking him by the hand.  d coom, if it was twonty mile.', 'No, would you though?', 'Ods-bobs, dost thee not know me, mun? Browdie. Chap as met thee efther schoolmeasther was banged?', 'Yes, yes, Oh! help me.', 'Help thee! Thee didn t as silly yoongster as ever draw at did ', 'He brought me; oh! he brought me,', 'Brout thee! Why didn ee punch his head, or lay theeself doon and kick, and squeal out for the pollis? I  licked a doozen such as him when I was yoong as thee. But thee be  said John, sadly,   me for bragging ower yan o', 'Stan  said the Yorkshireman,  ee speak a morsel o ee.', 'See thot? Thot be thy doin !', 'I say, coot awa  repeated John, hastily.  s?', 'Mine,', 'On wi em, s neck.  st ootside door, turn to the right, and they wean', 'But--but--he', 'Then dean  retorted John Browdie.  t afeard o s takkin cold, I hope?', 'N-no, But he brought me back before, and will again. He will, he will indeed.', 'He wull, he wull! He wean t. Look s gotten awa  theeself, but if he cooms oot o t clearing off, he mun t. If he foinds it oot, soon efther, I un on a wrong scent, I warrant  st a good hart, thee st gotten off. Coom!', 'Thee m sploiced to  t jealous of  m loike to boost when I think o Cod, I think I see   awa  butther!', 'un--dang it, I  that neight!  un now, a powderin  at the thin bread an', 'No! I think not, I don', 'You shall stay here, you ll tell them you', 'God bless him!', 'Amen! He hasn s rest or peace; no more has the old lady, nor Miss Nickleby.', 'No, no. Has SHE thought about me? Has she though? oh, has she, has she? Don', 'She has, She is as noble-hearted as she is beautiful.', 'Yes, yes! Well said!', 'So mild and gentle,', 'Yes, yes!', 'And yet with such a true and gallant spirit,', 'Well, well, It has touched ME, more than once, to think such a nature should have been exposed to such trials; this poor fellow--yes, yes,--he feels that too--it softens him--makes him think of his former misery. Hah! That s--hum!', 'A fine morning, Mr. Linkinwater!', 'Ah! talk of the country, indeed! What do you think of this, now, for a day--a London day--eh?', 'It', 'Clearer! You should see it from my bedroom window.', 'You should see it from MINE,', 'Pooh! pooh! don  (Bow was quite a rustic place to Tim.)  s worth a run upstairs to smell my mignonette, or to see the double wallflower in the back-attic window, at No. 6, in the court.', 'There is a double wallflower at No. 6, in the court, is there?', 'Yes, is there! and planted in a cracked jug, without a spout. There were hyacinths there, this last spring, blossoming, in--but you', 'At what?', 'At their blossoming in old blacking-bottles,', 'Not I, indeed,', 'They belong to a sickly bedridden hump-backed boy, and seem to be the only pleasure, Mr. Nickleby, of his sad existence. How many years is it, since I first noticed him, quite a little child, dragging himself about on a pair of tiny crutches? Well! Well! Not many; but though they would appear nothing, if I thought of other things, they seem a long, long time, when I think of him. It is a sad thing, to see a little deformed child sitting apart from other children, who are active and merry, watching the games he is denied the power to share in. He made my heart ache very often.', 'It is a good heart, that disentangles itself from the close avocations of every day, to heed such things. You were saying--', 'That the flowers belonged to this poor boy, that', 'Is there nobody in the house to cheer or help him?', 'His father lives there, I believe, and other people too; but no one seems to care much for the poor sickly cripple. I have asked him, very often, if I can do nothing for him; his answer is always the same. "Nothing." His voice is growing weak of late, but I can SEE that he makes the old reply. He can', 'The night will not be long coming, when he will sleep, and never wake again on earth. We have never so much as shaken hands in all our lives; and yet I shall miss him like an old friend. Are there any country flowers that could interest me like these, do you think? Or do you suppose that the withering of a hundred kinds of the choicest flowers that blow, called by the hardest Latin names that were ever invented, would give me one fraction of the pain that I shall feel when these old jugs and bottles are swept away as lumber? Country! don t have such a court under my bedroom window, anywhere, but in London?', 'I  said Nicholas,  s the case.', 'He can  thought Nicholas.  ll lay it on his table.', 'My dear ma  cried brother Charles in violent agitation,  t--not another word, I beseech and entreat you! I implore you--I beg of you--to rise. We--we--are not alone.', 'She has fainted, sir,', 'Poor dear, poor dear! Where is my brother Ned? Ned, my dear brother, come here pray.', 'Brother Charles, my dear fellow, what is the--ah! what--', 'Hush! hush!--not a word for your life, brother Ned, Ring for the housekeeper, my dear brother--call Tim Linkinwater! Here, Tim Linkinwater, sir--Mr. Nickleby, my dear sir, leave the room, I beg and beseech of you.', 'I think she is better now,', 'Poor bird! Brother Ned, my dear fellow, you will be surprised, I know, to witness this, in business hours; but--', 'Is she quite recovered?', 'Who?', 'Who! The young lady.', 'What do you make, Mr. Nickleby, what do you make of four hundred and twenty-seven times three thousand two hundred and thirty-eight?', 'Nay, what do you make of my question first? I asked you--', 'About the young lady, To be sure. Yes. Oh! she', 'To be sure. Yes. Oh! she', 'Very well, is she?', 'Very well,', 'Will she be able to go home today?', 'She', 'Gone!', 'Yes.', 'I hope she has not far to go?', 'Ay, I hope she hasn', 'It  whispered Newman.  s a dear young man, and let me tell you all about it.', 'There  said Newman, in a flutter of exultation.  s all right. Don t know where to begin. Never mind that. Keep up your spirits. It', 'It t be anxious. I don s all right.', 'Well? Yes?', 'Yes, That', 'What  said Nicholas. ', 'The name', 'Bobster!', 'That  said Newman. ', 'Bobster! That must be the servant', 'No, it an  said Newman, shaking his head with great positiveness. ', 'Miss Cecilia Bobster.', 'Cecilia, eh? Well, Cecilia is a pretty name.', 'Very. And a pretty creature too,', 'Who?', 'Miss Bobster.', 'Why, where have you seen her?', 'Never mind, my dear boy, I HAVE seen her. You shall see her. I', 'I HAVE seen her. You shall see her. I', 'My dear Newman, are you serious?', 'I am, I mean it all. Every word. You shall see her tomorrow night. She consents to hear you speak for yourself. I persuaded her. She is all affability, goodness, sweetness, and beauty.', 'I know she is; I know she must be, Newman!', 'You are right,', 'Where does she live? What have you learnt of her history? Has she a father--mother--any brothers--sisters? What did she say? How came you to see her? Was she not very much surprised? Did you say how passionately I have longed to speak to her? Did you tell her where I had seen her? Did you tell her how, and when, and where, and how long, and how often, I have thought of that sweet face which came upon me in my bitterest distress like a glimpse of some better world--did you, Newman--did you?', 'No, I didn', 'Didn', 'About the glimpse of the better world, I didn d seen her. I said you loved her to distraction.', 'That  replied Nicholas, with his characteristic vehemence. ', 'I said too, that you had admired her for a long time in secret,', 'Yes, yes. What did she say to that?', 'Blushed,', 'To be sure. Of course she would,', 'Things come about very strangely! I never contemplated anything of this kind; never dreamt of the possibility of it. To know something of the life of one in whom I felt such interest; to see her in the street, to pass the house in which she lived, to meet her sometimes in her walks, to hope that a day might come when I might be in a condition to tell her of my love, this was the utmost extent of my thoughts. Now, however--but I should be a fool, indeed, to repine at my own good fortune!', 'Number twelve,', 'Oh!', 'Good street?', 'Yes, Rather dull.', 'Well?', 'All right, All ready; nobody at home. Couldn', 'What the devil! Are we to sneak into the kitchen, as if we came after the forks?', 'Hush! Old Bobster--ferocious Turk. He em all--box the young lady', 'What! do you mean to tell me that any man would dare to box the ears of such a--', 'Well! this is not all, I suppose, is it?', 'No, no, they s all right.', 'I am glad to hear it, I shouldn', 'Yes, Who is that?', 'Only me, sir, Now if you please, ma', 'Leave the house, for Heaven  cried the young lady. ', 'Will you hear me say but one word? Only one. I will not detain you. Will you hear me say one word, in explanation of this mischance?', 'Let me go, Newman, in the Devil  cried Nicholas. ', 'Reputation--character--violence--consider, Let them open the door. We s shut. Come. This way. Here.', 'Never mind, Don s all right. More fortunate next time. It couldn', 'Excellently, Excellently, and like the true and zealous friend you are. Only--mind, I am not disappointed, Newman, and feel just as much indebted to you--only IT WAS THE WRONG LADY.', 'Eh? Taken in by the servant?', 'Newman, Newman, it was the wrong servant too.', 'Don  said Nicholas;  s of no consequence; you see I don s all.', 'Ah! if Nicholas knew what his poor dear papa suffered before we were engaged, when I used to hate him, he would have a little more feeling. Shall I ever forget the morning I looked scornfully at him when he offered to carry my parasol? Or that night, when I frowned at him? It was a mercy he didn', 'Kate, my dear, I don', 'That', 'Upon my word, my dear, I don  replied Mrs. Nickleby.  t have been a pig, either, because I recollect there were a pair of them to carve, and your poor papa and I could never have thought of sitting down to two pigs--they must have been partridges. Roast pig! I hardly think we ever could have had one, now I come to remember, for your papa could never bear the sight of them in the shops, and used to say that they always put him in mind of very little babies, only the pigs had much fairer complexions; and he had a horror of little babies, too, because he couldn s very odd now, what can have put that in my head! I recollect dining once at Mrs. Bevan s, where the tipsy man fell through the cellar-flap of an empty house nearly a week before the quarter-day, and wasn t sing exactly, for he talked and swore dreadfully: but I think it must be that. Indeed I am sure it must. Shouldn', 'I should say there was not a doubt about it, mama,', 'No; but DO you think so, Kate? If you don s just as well to be correct, particularly on a point of this kind, which is very curious and worth settling while one thinks about it.', 'If you don s just as well to be correct, particularly on a point of this kind, which is very curious and worth settling while one thinks about it.', 'Well, I will say, that there never was such a good creature as Smike. Upon my word, the pains he has taken in putting this little arbour to rights, and training the sweetest flowers about it, are beyond anything I could have--I wish he wouldn', 'Dear mama, take this seat--do--to oblige me, mama.', 'No, indeed, my dear. I shall keep my own side, Well! I declare!', 'Well! I declare!', 'If he hasn  said Mrs. Nickleby,  t--it t see, any of them on my side, but I suppose they grow best near the gravel. You may depend upon it they do, Kate, and that s the sunny side. Upon my word, that t have had half as much thought myself!', 'any of them on my side, but I suppose they grow best near the gravel. You may depend upon it they do, Kate, and that s the sunny side. Upon my word, that t have had half as much thought myself!', 'Mama, before you were married--', 'Dear me, Kate, what in the name of goodness graciousness makes you fly off to the time before I was married, when I t seem to take the smallest interest in the garden.', 'Oh! mama, you know I do.', 'Well then, my dear, why don s kept? How very odd you are, Kate!', 'I do praise it, mama, Poor fellow!', 'I scarcely ever hear you, my dear, that ve got to say.', 'About what, mama?', 'Lor, Kate, my dear, why, you', 'Oh yes! I remember. I was going to ask, mama, before you were married, had you many suitors?', 'Suitors, my dear! First and last, Kate, I must have had a dozen at least.', 'Mama!', 'I had indeed, my dear, not including your poor papa, or a young gentleman who used to go, at that time, to the same dancing school, and who WOULD send gold watches and bracelets to our house in gilt-edged paper, (which were always returned,) and who afterwards unfortunately went out to Botany Bay in a cadet ship--a convict ship I mean--and escaped into a bush and killed sheep, (I don  said Mrs. Nickleby, beginning with her left thumb and checking off the names on her fingers--', 'Mama! what was that?', 'Upon my word, my dear, unless it was the gentleman belonging to the next house, I don', 'unless it was the gentleman belonging to the next house, I don', 'A--hem!', 'I understand it now, my dear, s;  t be alarmed, my love, it', 'What do you mean, mama?', 'Don  replied Mrs. Nickleby, looking towards the garden-wall,  m not, and if it would be excusable in anybody to be flurried, it certainly would--under all the circumstances--be excusable in me, but I am not, Kate--not at all.', 'It seems designed to attract our attention, mama,', 'It is designed to attract our attention, my dear; at least, s hand more blandly than before,  t be at all uneasy, my dear.', 'Mama! why do you stop, why do you lose an instant? Mama, pray come in!', 'Kate, my dear, how can you be so foolish? I re such a coward as this? What do you want, sir? How dare you look into this garden?', 'Queen of my soul, this goblet sip!', 'this goblet sip!', 'Nonsense, sir, Kate, my love, pray be quiet.', 'Won  urged the stranger, with his head imploringly on one side, and his right hand on his breast. ', 'I shall not consent to do anything of the kind, sir, Pray, begone.', 'Why is it, why is it that beauty is always obdurate, even when admiration is as honourable and respectful as mine? Is it owing to the bees, who, when the honey season is over, and they are supposed to have been killed with brimstone, in reality fly to Barbary and lull the captive Moors to sleep with their drowsy songs? Or is it, in consequence of the statue at Charing Cross having been lately seen, on the Stock Exchange at midnight, walking arm-in-arm with the Pump from Aldgate, in a riding-habit?', 'Mama, do you hear him?', 'Hush, my dear! he is very polite, and I think that was a quotation from the poets. Pray, don ll pinch my arm black and blue. Go away, sir!', 'Quite away? Oh! quite away?', 'Yes, certainly. You have no business here. This is private property, sir; you ought to know that.', 'I do know, that this is a sacred and enchanted spot, where the most divine charms waft mellifluousness over the neighbours', 'Kate, it t know what to say to this gentleman. One ought to be civil, you know.', 'Dear mama, don', 'If you will conduct yourself, sir, like the gentleman I should imagine you to be, from your language and--and--appearance, (quite the counterpart of your grandpapa, Kate, my dear, in his best days,) and will put your question to me in plain words, I will answer it.', 'The question is--', 'Are you a princess?', 'You are mocking me, sir,', 'No, but are you?', 'You know I am not, sir,', 'Then are you any relation to the Archbishop of Canterbury? or to the Pope of Rome? Or the Speaker of the House of Commons? Forgive me, if I am wrong, but I was told you were niece to the Commissioners of Paving, and daughter-in-law to the Lord Mayor and Court of Common Council, which would account for your relationship to all three.', 'Whoever has spread such reports, sir, has taken great liberties with my name, and one which I am sure my son Nicholas, if he was aware of it, would not allow for an instant. The idea! niece to the Commissioners of Paving!', 'Pray, mama, come away!', '"Pray mama!" Nonsense, Kate, but that  whimpered Mrs. Nickleby.  t expect it, that', 'Tears! Catch the crystal globules--catch  em up--cork  em with a cupid--label  em away in the fourteen binn, with a bar of iron on the top to keep the thunder off!', 'em away in the fourteen binn, with a bar of iron on the top to keep the thunder off!', 'Beautiful madam, if I have made any mistake with regard to your family or connections, I humbly beseech you to pardon me. If I supposed you to be related to Foreign Powers or Native Boards, it is because you have a manner, a carriage, a dignity, which you will excuse my saying that none but yourself (with the single exception perhaps of the tragic muse, when playing extemporaneously on the barrel organ before the East India Company) can parallel. I am not a youth, ma', 'Really, Kate, my love!', 'I have estates, ma  said the old gentleman, flourishing his right hand negligently, as if he made very light of such matters, and speaking very fast;  s head, you will find my card in the lining of the crown, wrapped up in a piece of blue paper. My walking-stick is also to be seen on application to the chaplain of the House of Commons, who is strictly forbidden to take any money for showing it. I have enemies about me, ma  he looked towards his house and spoke very low, ', 'Be mine, be mine!', 'Kate, my dear, I have hardly the power to speak; but it is necessary for the happiness of all parties that this matter should be set at rest for ever.', 'Surely there is no necessity for you to say one word, mama?', 'You will allow me, my dear, if you please, to judge for myself,', 'Be mine, be mine!', 'It can scarcely be expected, sir, that I should tell a stranger whether I feel flattered and obliged by such proposals, or not. They certainly are made under very singular circumstances; still at the same time, as far as it goes, and to a certain extent of course s customary qualification),  s feelings.', 'Be mine, be mine, Gog and Magog, Gog and Magog. Be mine, be mine!', 'It will be sufficient for me to say, sir, and I ll see the propriety of taking an answer and going away--that I have made up my mind to remain a widow, and to devote myself to my children. You may not suppose I am the mother of two children--indeed many people have doubted it, and said that nothing on earth could ever make  m sure--but in any other character it t think of it for an instant, not on any account whatever. I said I never would, and I never will. It', 'It', 'Yes, it', 'How', 'Oh! he  was the reply. ', 'The young Prince of China, Is he reconciled to his father-in-law, the great potato salesman?', 'Is he reconciled to his father-in-law, the great potato salesman?', 'No, and he says he never will be, that', 'If that  observed the old gentleman,  d better come down.', 'Well, I think you had, perhaps.', 'Beg your pardon, ladies, Has he been making love to either of you?', 'Yes,', 'Ah! he always will, you know. Nothing will prevent his making love.', 'I need not ask you if he is out of his mind, poor creature,', 'Why no, That', 'Has he been long so?', 'A long while.', 'And is there no hope for him?', 'Not a bit, and don  replied the keeper.  s a deal pleasanter without his senses than with ', 'Indeed!', 'By George! I never come across such a vagabond, and my mate says the same. Broke his poor wife d have drove many others so. Hope for HIM, an old rip! There isn ll bet a crown that what there is, is saved for more deserving chaps than him, anyhow.', 'Poor creature!', 'Ah! poor indeed! It', 'How can they be helped, mama? The infirmities of nature--', 'Nature! What! Do YOU suppose this poor gentleman is out of his mind?', 'Can anybody who sees him entertain any other opinion, mama?', 'Why then, I just tell you this, Kate, that, he is nothing of the kind, and I am surprised you can be so imposed upon. It t he say so himself? He may be a little odd and flighty, perhaps, many of us are that; but downright mad! and express himself as he does, respectfully, and in quite poetical language, and making offers with so much thought, and care, and prudence--not as if he ran into the streets, and went down upon his knees to the first chit of a girl he met, as a madman would! No, no, Kate, there', 'Let me see the child, and die.', 'Oh, you must not talk about dying yet.', 'Lor bless her dear heart, no!', 'Lor bless her dear heart, when she has lived as long as I have, sir, and had thirteen children of her own, and all on  ll know better than to take on in that way, bless her dear heart!  Think what it is to be a mother, there', 'It', 'Ah, poor dear, so it is! Poor dear!', 'You needn  said the surgeon, putting on his gloves with great deliberation.  s very likely it _will_ be troublesome. Give it a little gruel if it is. She was a good-looking girl, too; where did she come from?', 'She was brought here last night, by the overseer', 'Goodness gracious!  Is that you, Mr. Bumble, sir? (Susan, take Oliver and them two brats upstairs, and wash ', '(Susan, take Oliver and them two brats upstairs, and wash ', 'Lor, only think, only think of that!  That I should have forgotten that the gate was bolted on the inside, on account of them dear children!  Walk in sir; walk in, pray, Mr. Bumble, do, sir.', 'Do you think this respectful or proper conduct, Mrs. Mann, to keep the parish officers a waiting at your garden-gate, when they come here upon porochial business with the porochial orphans?  Are you aweer, Mrs. Mann, that you are, as I may say, a porochial delegate, and a stipendiary?', 'I', 'Well, well, Mrs. Mann, it may be as you say; it may be.  Lead the way in, Mrs. Mann, for I come on business, and have something to say.', 'Now don m a going to say, You t mention it.  Now, will you take a little drop of somethink, Mr. Bumble?', 'Not a drop.  Nor a drop,', 'I think you will, Just a leetle drop, with a little cold water, and a lump of sugar.', 'Now, just a leetle drop,', 'What is it?', 'Why, it m obliged to keep a little of in the house, to put into the blessed infants t well, Mr. Bumble, It ll not deceive you, Mr. B.  It', 'Do you give the children Daffy, Mrs. Mann?', 'Ah, bless   replied the nurse.  t see ', 'No no, you could not.  You are a humane woman, Mrs. Mann. I shall take a early opportunity of mentioning it to the board, Mrs. Mann. You feel as a mother, Mrs. Mann. I--I drink your health with cheerfulness, Mrs. Mann', 'And now about business, The child that was half-baptized Oliver Twist, is nine year old to-day.', 'Bless him!', 'And notwithstanding a offered reward of ten pound, which was afterwards increased to twenty pound.  Notwithstanding the most superlative, and, I may say, supernat  said Bumble,  s settlement, name, or condition.', 'You, Mr. Bumble!', 'I, Mrs. Mann.  We name our fondlings in alphabetical order. The last was a S,--Swubble, I named him. This was a T,--Twist, I named _him_. The next one comes will be Unwin, and the next Vilkins.  I have got names ready made to the end of the alphabet, and all the way through it again, when we come to Z.', 'Why, you', 'Well, well, perhaps I may be.  Perhaps I may be, Mrs. Mann. Oliver being now too old to remain here, the board have determined to have him back into the house.  I have come out myself to take him there.  So let me see him at once.', 'perhaps I may be.  Perhaps I may be, Mrs. Mann. Oliver being now too old to remain here, the board have determined to have him back into the house.  I have come out myself to take him there.  So let me see him at once.', 'I', 'Make a bow to the gentleman, Oliver,', 'Will you go along with me, Oliver?', 'Will she go with me?', 'No, she can  replied Mr. Bumble.   ll come and see you sometimes.', 'Bow to the board,', 'What', 'Boy, listen to me. You know you', 'What', 'The boy _is_ a fool--I thought he was,', 'Hush! You know you t you?', 'Yes, sir,', 'What are you crying for?', 'I hope you say your prayers every night, and pray for the people who feed you, and take care of you--like a Christian.', 'Yes, sir,', 'Well!  You have come here to be educated, and taught a useful trade,', 'So you clock,', 'Please, sir, I want some more.', 'What!', 'Please, sir, I want some more.', 'Mr. Limbkins, I beg your pardon, sir!  Oliver Twist has asked for more!', 'For _more_! Compose yourself, Bumble, and answer me distinctly.  Do I understand that he asked for more, after he had eaten the supper allotted by the dietary?', 'He did, sir,', 'That boy will be hung, I know that boy will be hung.', 'I never was more convinced of anything in my life, I never was more convinced of anything in my life, than I am that that boy will come to be hung.', 'Wo--o!', 'This here boy, sir, wot the parish wants to ', 'Ay, my man, What of him?', 'If the parish vould like him to learn a right pleasant trade, in a good   bisness, I wants a ', 'Walk in,', 'It', 'Young boys have been smothered in chimneys before now,', 'That em come down again, that t o s wot he likes.  Boys is wery obstinit, and wery lazy, Gen men, and there em come down vith a run.  It l ve stuck in the chimbley, roasting their feet makes ', 'We have considered your proposition, and we don', 'Not at all,', 'Decidedly not,', 'So you won l', 'No, at least, as it', 'What l t be too hard on a poor man. What', 'I should say, three pound ten was plenty,', 'Ten shillings too much,', 'Come! say four pound, gen men.  Say four pound, and you', 'Three pound ten,', 'Come!  I erence, gen men, Three pound fifteen.', 'Not a farthing more,', 'You l', 'Pooh!  pooh!  nonsense! He s just the boy for you.  He wants the stick, now and then: it t come very expensive, for he hasn', 'He s just the boy for you.  He wants the stick, now and then: it t come very expensive, for he hasn', 'Don  said Mr. Bumble, in a tone of impressive pomposity.  re a going to be made a ', 'A prentice, sir!', 'Yes, Oliver, The kind and blessed gentleman which is so many parents to you, Oliver, when you have none of your own: are a going to   you: and to set you up in life, and make a man of you: although the expense to the parish is three pound ten!--three pound ten, Oliver!--seventy shillins--one hundred and forty sixpences!--and all for a naughty orphan which nobody can', 'Come, Come, Oliver!  Wipe your eyes with the cuffs of your jacket, and don s a very foolish action, Oliver.', 'Come, Oliver!  Wipe your eyes with the cuffs of your jacket, and don s a very foolish action, Oliver.', 'Now, Oliver, my dear, come to the gentleman. Mind what I told you, you young rascal!', 'Mind what I told you, you young rascal!', 'This is the boy, your worship,', 'Oh, is this the boy?', 'This is him, sir, Bow to the magistrate, my dear.', 'Well, I suppose he', 'He doats on it, your worship,', 'And he _will_ be a sweep, will he?', 'If we was to bind him to any other trade to-morrow, he', 'And this man that ll treat him well, and feed him, and do all that sort of thing, will you?', 'When I says I will, I means I will,', 'You  said the old gentleman: turning his spectacles in the direction of the candidate for Oliver', 'I hope I am, sir,', 'I have no doubt you are, my friend,', 'My boy! you look pale and alarmed. What is the matter?', 'Stand a little away from him, Beadle, Now, boy, tell us what t be afraid.', 'Well! Well! of all the artful and designing orphans that ever I see, Oliver, you are one of the most bare-facedest.', 'Hold your tongue, Beadle,', 'I beg your worship  said Mr. Bumble, incredulous of having heard aright.  ', 'Yes.  Hold your tongue.', 'We refuse to sanction these indentures,', 'I hope, I hope the magistrates will not form the opinion that the authorities have been guilty of any improper conduct, on the unsupported testimony of a child.', 'The magistrates are not called upon to pronounce any opinion on the matter, Take the boy back to the workhouse, and treat him kindly.  He seems to want it.', 'I have taken the measure of the two women that died last night, Mr. Bumble,', 'You  said the beadle, as he thrust his thumb and forefinger into the proffered snuff-box of the undertaker: which was an ingenious little model of a patent coffin.   ll make your fortune, Mr. Sowerberry,', 'Think so? The prices allowed by the board are very small, Mr. Bumble.', 'So are the coffins,', 'Well, well, every trade has its drawbacks. A fair profit is, of course, allowable.', 'Of course, of course, and if I don', 'Just so,', 'Though I must say, though I must say, Mr. Bumble, that I have to contend against one very great disadvantage: which is, that all the stout people go off the quickest.  The people who have been better off, and have paid rates for many years, are the first to sink when they come into the house; and let me tell you, Mr. Bumble, that three or four inches over one s profits: especially when one has a family to provide for, sir.', 'By the bye, you don prentis, who is at present a dead-weight; a millstone, as I may say, round the porochial throat?  Liberal terms, Mr. Sowerberry, liberal terms? five pounds', 'five pounds', 'Gadso! that', 'Yes, I think it rather pretty, The die is the same as the porochial seal--the Good Samaritan healing the sick and bruised man. The board presented it to me on Newyear', 'I recollect, The jury brought it in, "Died from exposure to the cold, and want of the common necessaries of life," didn', 'And they made it a special verdict, I think, by adding some words to the effect, that if the relieving officer had--', 'Tush!  Foolery! If the board attended to all the nonsense that ignorant jurymen talk, they', 'Very true, they would indeed.', 'Juries, juries is ineddicated, vulgar, grovelling wretches.', 'So they are,', 'They haven em than that,', 'No more they have,', 'I despise ', 'So do I,', 'And I only wish we  said the beadle;  em.', 'Let ', 'Well; what about the boy?', 'Oh! why, you know, Mr. Bumble, I pay a good deal towards the poor', 'Hem! Well?', 'Well, I was thinking that if I pay so much towards  ve a right to get as much out of  ll take the boy myself.', 'Oliver!', 'Yes, sir,', 'Pull that cap off your eyes, and hold up your head, sir.', 'Well! Well!  Of _all_ the ungratefullest, and worst-disposed boys as ever I see, Oliver, you are the--', 'No, no, sir, no, no, sir; I will be good indeed; indeed, indeed I will, sir!  I am a very little boy, sir; and it is so--so--', 'So what?', 'So lonely, sir!  So very lonely! Everybody hates me.  Oh! sir, don t pray be cross to me!', 'Aha! is that you, Bumble?', 'No one else, Mr. Sowerberry, Here! I', 'Oh! that  said the undertaker:  raising the candle above his head, to get a better view of Oliver. ', 'My dear, this is the boy from the workhouse that I told you of.', 'Dear me! s wife,  s very small.', 'Why, he _is_ rather small, he is small. There ll grow, Mrs. Sowerberry--he', 'Ah!  I dare say he will, on our victuals and our drink.  I see no saving in parish children, not I; for they always cost more to keep, than they  bones. s wife opened a side door, and pushed Oliver down a steep flight of stairs into a stone cell, damp and dark: forming the ante-room to the coal-cellar, and denominated ', 'Here, Charlotte, give this boy some of the cold bits that were put by for Trip.  He hasn em.  I dare say the boy isn em--are you, boy?', 'give this boy some of the cold bits that were put by for Trip.  He hasn em.  I dare say the boy isn em--are you, boy?', 'Well, s wife, when Oliver had finished his supper: which she had regarded in silent horror, and with fearful auguries of his future appetite: ', 'Then come with me, your bed t mind sleeping among the coffins, I suppose? But it doesn t, for you can t keep me here all night!', 'Open the door, will yer?', 'I will, directly, sir,', 'I suppose yer the new boy, ain', 'Yes, sir,', 'How old are yer?', 'Ten, sir,', 'Then I  said the voice;  t, that us brat!', 'I beg your pardon, sir, did you knock?', 'I kicked,', 'Did you want a coffin, sir?', 'Yer don us?', 'No, sir,', 'I  said the charity-boy,  re under me. Take down the shutters, yer idle young ruffian!', 'Come near the fire, Noah, I saved a nice little bit of bacon for you from master s back, and take them bits that I s your tea; take it away to that box, and drink it there, and make haste, for they ye hear?', 'D us?', 'Lor, Noah! what a rum creature you are!  Why don', 'Let him alone! Why everybody lets him alone enough, for the matter of that.  Neither his father nor his mother will ever interfere with him.  All his relations let him have his own way pretty well.  Eh, Charlotte?  He! he! he!', 'Oh, you queer soul!', 'leathers, charity,', 'My dear--', 'Well,', 'Nothing, my dear, nothing,', 'Ugh, you brute!', 'Not at all, my dear, I thought you didn', 'Oh, don  interposed Mrs. Sowerberry.   t consult me, pray.  _I_ don', 'But, my dear, I want to ask your advice.', 'No, no, don  replied Mrs. Sowerberry, in an affecting manner:  s.', 'It  said Mr. Sowerberry. ', 'He need be, for he eats enough,', 'There  resumed Mr. Sowerberry, ', 'I don s practice.  It would be very new to have a mute in proportion, my dear.  You may depend upon it, it would have a superb effect.', 'Aha! an order for a coffin, eh?', 'an order for a coffin, eh?', 'For a coffin first, and a porochial funeral afterwards,', 'Bayton, I never heard the name before.', 'Proud, eh? Come, that', 'Oh, it  replied the beadle.  ', 'So it is,', 'We only heard of the family the night before last, and we shouldn prentice (which is a very clever lad) sent ', 'and we shouldn prentice (which is a very clever lad) sent ', 'Ah, there', 'Promptness, indeed! But what s the ungrateful behaviour of these rebels, sir?  Why, the husband sends back word that the medicine won s complaint, and so she shan t take it, sir!  Good, strong, wholesome medicine, as was given with great success to two Irish labourers and a coal-heaver, only a week before--sent  -bottle in,--and he sends back word that she shan', 'Well, I ne--ver--did--', 'Never did, sir! No, nor nobody never did; but now she ve got to bury her; and that s done, the better.', 'Why, he was so angry, Oliver, that he forgot even to ask after you!', 'Yes, sir,', 'Well, the sooner this job is done, the better.  Noah, look after the shop. Oliver, put on your cap, and come with me.', 'Nobody shall go near her, Keep back! Damn you, keep back, if you', 'Nonsense, my good man, Nonsense!', 'I tell you, I tell you I won t rest there.  The worms would worry her--not eat her--she is so worn away.', 'Ah! kneel down, kneel down--kneel round her, every one of you, and mark my words!  I say she was starved to death. I never knew how bad she was, till the fever came upon her; and then her bones were starting through the skin.  There was neither fire nor candle; she died in the dark--in the dark!  She couldn s faces, though we heard her gasping out their names. I begged for her in the streets: and they sent me to prison. When I came back, she was dying; and all the blood in my heart has dried up, for they starved her to death.  I swear it before the God that saw it! They starved her!', 'She was my daughter, Lord, Lord! Well, it _is_ strange that I who gave birth to her, and was a woman then, should be alive and merry now, and she lying there: so cold and stiff!  Lord, Lord!--to think of it; it', 'Stop, stop! Will she be buried to-morrow, or next day, or to-night?  I laid her out; and I must walk, you know.  Send me a large cloak: a good warm one: for it is bitter cold.  We should have cake and wine, too, before we go!  Never mind; send some bread--only a loaf of bread and a cup of water.  Shall we have some bread, dear?', 'Yes, yes, of course.  Anything you like!', 'Now, you must put your best leg foremost, old lady! s ear;  t do, to keep the clergyman waiting.  Move on, my men,--as quick as you like!', 'Now, Bill! Fill up!', 'Come, my good fellow! They want to shut up the yard.', 'Well, Oliver, how do you like it?', 'Pretty well, thank you, sir Not very much, sir.', 'Ah, you  said Sowerberry. ', 'Work  said Noah,  s your mother?', 'She  replied Oliver;  t you say anything about her to me!', 'What did she die of, Work', 'Of a broken heart, some of our old nurses told me, I think I know what it must be to die of that!', 'Tol de rol lol lol, right fol lairy, Work  said Noah, as a tear rolled down Oliver What', 'Not _you_, There; that t say anything more to me about her; you', 'Better not! Well!  Better not!  Work t be impudent.  _Your_ mother, too!  She was a nice ', 'Yer know, Work  continued Noah, emboldened by Oliver Yer know, Work t be helped now; and of course yer couldn m sure we all are, and pity yer very much.  But yer must know, Work un.', 'What did you say?', 'A regular right-down bad  us, And it us, that she died when she did, or else she t it?', 'He  blubbered Noah.   s the new boy a murdering of me!  Help! help!  Oliver', 'Oh, you little wretch! Oh, you little un-grate-ful, mur-de-rous, hor-rid villain!', 'Bless her, she  said Charlotte.  ', 'Oh!  Charlotte, Oh! Charlotte, what a mercy we have not all been murdered in our beds!', 'Ah! mercy indeed, ma  was the reply.  I only hope this am, when I come in.', 'Poor fellow!', 'What  exclaimed Mrs. Sowerberry.   s not at home; there ll kick that door down in ten minutes.', 'Dear, dear!  I don am, unless we send for the police-officers.', 'Or the millingtary,', 'No, no, s old friend.   ll keep the swelling down.', 'Why, what', 'Mr. Bumble!  Mr. Bumble!', 'Oh, Mr. Bumble, sir! Oliver, sir,--Oliver has--', 'What?  What? Not run away; he hasn', 'No, sir, no.  Not run away, sir, but he  replied Noah. ', 'It  replied Mr. Bumble, ', 'By Jove! I knew it!  I felt a strange presentiment from the very first, that that audacious young savage would come to be hung!', 'He has likewise attempted, sir, to murder the female servant,', 'And his missis,', 'And his master, too, I think you said, Noah?', 'No! he  replied Noah. ', 'Ah!  Said he wanted to, did he, my boy?', 'Yes, sir, And please, sir, missis wants to know whether Mr. Bumble can spare time to step up there, directly, and flog him-- s out.', 'Certainly, my boy; certainly, s head, which was about three inches higher than his own.   re a good boy--a very good boy. Here s with your cane, and see what t spare him, Bumble.', 'No, I will not, sir, s satisfaction, Mr. Bumble and Noah Claypole betook themselves with all speed to the undertaker', 'Oliver!', 'Come; you let me out!', 'Do you know this here voice, Oliver?', 'Yes,', 'Ain t you a-trembling while I speak, sir?', 'No!', 'Oh, you know, Mr. Bumble, he must be mad,', 'No boy in half his senses could venture to speak so to you.', 'It am, It', 'What?', 'Meat, ma  replied Bumble, with stern emphasis.  ve over-fed him, ma ve raised a artificial soul and spirit in him, ma s quite enough that we let  am, this would never have happened.', 'Dear, dear! this comes of being liberal!', 'Ah! the only thing that can be done now, that I know of, is to leave him in the cellar for a day or so, till he', 'Now, you are a nice young fellow, ain', 'He called my mother names,', 'Well, and what if he did, you little ungrateful wretch? She deserved what he said, and worse.', 'She didn', 'She did,', 'It', 'Hush, Dick! Is any one up?', 'Nobody but me,', 'You musn  said Oliver.   t know where.  How pale you are!', 'I heard the doctor tell them I was dying, I am very glad to see you, dear; but don t stop!', 'Yes, yes, I will, to say good-b  replied Oliver. ', 'I hope so, After I am dead, but not before.  I know the doctor must be right, Oliver, because I dream so much of Heaven, and Angels, and kind faces that I never see when I am awake. Kiss me, s neck.  ye, dear!  God bless you!', 'is a very comfortable thing; and so are two pairs of darned stockings; and so is a penny; but they are small helps to a sixty-five miles   But Oliver', 'Hullo, my covey!  What', 'Hullo, my covey!  What', 'I am very hungry and tired, I have walked a long way.  I have been walking these seven days.', 'Walking for sivin days! Oh, I see. Beak  he added, noticing Oliver I suppose you don', 'My eyes, how green! Why, a beak rate; and when you walk by a beak s not straight forerd, but always agoing up, and niver a coming down agin.  Was you never on the mill?', 'What mill?', 'What mill!  Why, _the_ mill--the mill as takes up so little room that it s low with people, than when it t get workmen. But come, you want grub, and you shall have it.  I ll fork out and stump.  Up with you on your pins. There!  Now then! ', 'Going to London?', 'Yes.', 'Got any lodgings?', 'No.', 'Money?', 'No.', 'Do you live in London?', 'Yes. I do, when I  replied the boy.  t you?', 'I do, indeed, I have not slept under a roof since I left the country.', 'Don  said the young gentleman.  ve got to be in London to-night; and I know a  ll give you lodgings for nothink, and never ask for the change--that is, if any genelman he knows interduces you. And don', 'I spectable old gentleman as lives there, wot t he know me?  Oh, no! Not in the least!  By no means. Certainly not!', 'Now, then!', 'Plummy and slam!', 'There  said the man, thrusting the candle farther out, and shielding his eyes with his hand.   s the t', 'A new pal,', 'Where did he come from?', 'Greenland. Is Fagin upstairs?', 'Yes, he  the wipes.  Up with you!', 'This is him, Fagin, my friend Oliver Twist.', 'We are very glad to see you, Oliver, very, Dodger, take off the sausages; and draw a tub near the fire for Oliver.  Ah, you em, ain ve just looked  s all, Oliver; that', 'Aha! Clever dogs! Clever dogs! Staunch to the last! Never told the old parson where they were. Never poached upon old Fagin! And why should they? It wouldn', 'What a fine thing capital punishment is! Dead men never repent; dead men never bring awkward stories to light. Ah, it em strung up in a row, and none left to play booty, or turn white-livered!', 'What  said the Jew. ', 'I wasn  replied Oliver, meekly. ', 'You were not awake an hour ago?', 'No! No, indeed!', 'Are you sure?', 'Upon my word I was not, sir, I was not, indeed, sir.', 'Tush, tush, my dear! Of course I know that, my dear. I only tried to frighten you. You re a brave boy, Oliver.', 'Did you see any of these pretty things, my dear?', 'Yes, sir,', 'Ah! They--they s all.', 'Certainly, my dear, certainly, Stay. There ll give you a basin to wash in, my dear.', 'Well, I hope you', 'Hard,', 'As nails,', 'Good boys, good boys! What have you got, Dodger?', 'A couple of pocket-books,', 'Lined?', 'Pretty well,', 'Not so heavy as they might be, but very neat and nicely made.  Ingenious workman, ain', 'Very indeed, sir,', 'And what have you got, my dear?', 'Wipes,', 'Well, they t marked them well, though, Charley; so the marks shall be picked out with a needle, and we', 'If you please, sir,', 'You t you, my dear?', 'Very much, indeed, if you', 'He is so jolly green!', 'There, my dear, That t it? They have gone out for the day.', 'Have they done work, sir?', 'Yes, that is, unless they should unexpectedly come across any, when they are out; and they won em your models, my dear. Make   tapping the fire-shovel on the hearth to add force to his words;  s, my dear. He', 'Yes, sir,', 'See if you can take it out, without my feeling it; as you saw them do, when we were at play this morning.', 'Is it gone?', 'Here it is, sir,', 'You  said the playful old gentleman, patting Oliver on the head approvingly.  s a shilling for you. If you go on, in this way, you ll show you how to take the marks out of the handkerchiefs.', 'What', 'Hush! Do you see that old cove at the book-stall?', 'The old gentleman over the way? Yes, I see him.', 'He', 'A prime plant,', 'Stop thief! Stop thief!', 'Stop thief! Stop thief! Stop thief! Stop thief!', 'Stop thief! Stop thief! Stop thief!', 'Stop thief!', 'Yes, I am afraid it is the boy.', 'Afraid! That un!', 'Poor fellow! he has hurt himself.', '_I_ did that, sir, and preciously I cut my knuckle agin', 'and preciously I cut my knuckle agin', 'Come, get up,', 'It wasn  said Oliver, clasping his hands passionately, and looking round.  ', 'Oh no, they ain', 'Come, get up!', 'Don', 'Oh no, I won  replied the officer, tearing his jacket half off his back, in proof thereof.   t do.  Will you stand upon your legs, you young devil?', 'What', 'A young fogle-hunter,', 'Are you the party that', 'Yes, I am, but I am not sure that this boy actually took the handkerchief.  I--I would rather not press the case.', 'Must go before the magistrate now, sir, His worship will be disengaged in half a minute.  Now, young gallows!', 'There is something in that boy  said the old gentleman to himself as he walked slowly away, tapping his chin with the cover of the book, in a thoughtful manner;   exclaimed the old gentleman, halting very abruptly, and staring up into the sky, ', 'Bless my soul!--where have I seen something like that look before?', 'Who are you?', 'Officer! Who is this fellow?', 'My name, sir, my name, sir, is Brownlow.  Permit me to inquire the name of the magistrate who offers a gratuitous and unprovoked insult to a respectable person, under the protection of the bench.', 'my name, sir, is Brownlow.  Permit me to inquire the name of the magistrate who offers a gratuitous and unprovoked insult to a respectable person, under the protection of the bench.', 'Officer! what', 'He  replied the officer. ', 'Appears against the boy, does he? Swear him!', 'Before I am sworn, I must beg to say one word, and that is, that I really never, without actual experience, could have believed--', 'and that is, that I really never, without actual experience, could have believed--', 'Hold your tongue, sir!', 'I will not, sir!', 'Hold your tongue this instant, or I  said Mr. Fang.   re an insolent impertinent fellow.  How dare you bully a magistrate!', 'What!', 'Swear this person! I', 'Now, what', 'I was standing at a bookstall--', 'Hold your tongue, sir, Policeman!  Where', 'Are there any witnesses?', 'None, your worship,', 'Do you mean to state what your complaint against this boy is, man, or do you not?  You have been sworn.  Now, if you stand there, refusing to give evidence, I', 'He has been hurt already, And I fear, I really fear that he is ill.', 'Oh! yes, I dare say! Come, none of your tricks here, you young vagabond; they won s your name?', 'What  demanded Mr. Fang.  s his name?', 'Officer, what', 'He says his name', 'Oh, he won t he? Very well, very well. Where does he live?', 'Where he can, your worship,', 'Has he any parents?', 'He says they died in his infancy, your worship,', 'Stuff and nonsense! don', 'I think he really is ill, your worship,', 'I know better,', 'Take care of him, officer, he', 'Stand away, officer, let him, if he likes.', 'I knew he was shamming, Let him lie there; he', 'How do you propose to deal with the case, sir?', 'Summarily, He stands committed for three months--hard labour of course.  Clear the office.', 'Stop, stop!  don s sake stop a moment!', 'What is this?  Who is this?  Turn this man out.  Clear the office!', 'I _will_ speak, I will not be turned out.  I saw it all.  I keep the book-stall.  I demand to be sworn. I will not be put down.  Mr. Fang, you must hear me.  You must not refuse, sir.', 'Swear the man, Now, man, what have you got to say?', 'This, I saw three boys:  two others and the prisoner here:  loitering on the opposite side of the way, when this gentleman was reading.  The robbery was committed by another boy.  I saw it done; and I saw that this boy was perfectly amazed and stupified by it.', 'Why didn', 'I hadn  replied the man.   ve run here all the way.', 'The prosecutor was reading, was he?', 'Yes, The very book he has in his hand.', 'Oh, that book, eh? Is it paid for?', 'No, it is not,', 'Dear me, I forgot all about it!', 'A nice person to prefer a charge against a poor boy! I consider, sir, that you have obtained possession of that book, under very suspicious and disreputable circumstances; and you may think yourself very fortunate that the owner of the property declines to prosecute. Let this be a lesson to you, my man, or the law will overtake you yet.  The boy is discharged.  Clear the office!', 'D--n me! d--n me!   I', 'Clear the office! Officers, do you hear? Clear the office!', 'Poor boy, poor boy! Call a coach, somebody, pray.  Directly!', 'May I accompany you?', 'Bless me, yes, my dear sir, I forgot you.  Dear, dear!  I have this unhappy book still! Jump in.  Poor fellow!  There', 'What room is this?  Where have I been brought to? This is not the place I went to sleep in.', 'Hush, my dear, You must be very quiet, or you will be ill again; and you have been very bad,--as bad as bad could be, pretty nigh.  Lie down again; there   With those words, the old lady very gently placed Oliver', 'Save us! What a grateful little dear it is.  Pretty creetur!  What would his mother feel if she had sat by him as I have, and could see him now!', 'Perhaps she does see me, perhaps she has sat by me.  I almost feel as if she had.', 'That was the fever, my dear,', 'I suppose it was, because heaven is a long way off; and they are too happy there, to come down to the bedside of a poor boy.  But if she knew I was ill, she must have pitied me, even there; for she was very ill herself before she died.  She can  added Oliver after a moment If she had seen me hurt, it would have made her sorrowful; and her face has always looked sweet and happy, when I have dreamed of her.', 'You _are_ a great deal better, are you not, my dear?', 'Yes, thank you, sir,', 'Yes,  I know you are, You t you?', 'No, sir,', 'Hem! No, I know you', 'You feel sleepy, don', 'No, sir,', 'No, You', 'Yes, sir, rather thirsty,', 'Just as I expected, Mrs. Bedwin, It am, and some dry toast without any butter.  Don am; but be careful that you don', 'Never mind me, my dear, I s all over now; and I', 'You am,', 'Well, never you mind that, my dear, that s full time you had it; for the doctor says Mr. Brownlow may come in to see you this morning; and we must get up our best looks, because the better we look, the more he', 'Are you fond of pictures, dear?', 'I don am, I have seen so few that I hardly know.  What a beautiful, mild face that lady', 'Ah! painters always make ladies out prettier than they are, or they wouldn s a deal too honest.  A deal,', 'Is--is that a likeness, ma', 'Yes, that', 'that', 'Whose, ma', 'Why, really, my dear, I don  answered the old lady in a good-humoured manner.   s not a likeness of anybody that you or I know, I expect.  It seems to strike your fancy, dear.', 'It is so pretty,', 'Why, sure you', 'Oh no, no, but the eyes look so sorrowful; and where I sit, they seem fixed upon me.  It makes my heart beat, as if it was alive, and wanted to speak to me, but couldn', 'Lord save us! don re weak and nervous after your illness. Let me wheel your chair round to the other side; and then you won  said the old lady, suiting the action to the word;  t see it now, at all events.', 'Poor boy, poor boy! I m afraid I have caught cold.', 'I hope not, sir, Everything you have had, has been well aired, sir.', 'I don t know, I rather think I had a damp napkin at dinner-time yesterday; but never mind that.  How do you feel, my dear?', 'Very happy, sir, And very grateful indeed, sir, for your goodness to me.', 'Good by, Have you given him any nourishment, Bedwin?  Any slops, eh?', 'He has just had a basin of beautiful strong broth, sir,', 'Ugh! a couple of glasses of port wine would have done him a great deal more good. Wouldn', 'My name is Oliver, sir,', 'Oliver, Oliver what?  Oliver White, eh?', 'No, sir, Twist, Oliver Twist.', 'Queer name! What made you tell the magistrate your name was White?', 'I never told him so, sir,', 'Some mistake,', 'I hope you are not angry with me, sir?', 'No, no, Why! what', 'What', 'Ha! ha! ha!', 'Hold your noise, Do you want to be grabbed, stupid?', 'Do you want to be grabbed, stupid?', 'I can  said Charley,  t help it!  To see him splitting away at that pace, and cutting round the corners, and knocking up again', 'What', 'What?', 'Ah, what?', 'Why, what should he say? s manner was impressive.  ', 'What do you mean?', 'Toor rul lol loo, gammon and spinnage, the frog he wouldn', 'Why, how  muttered the Jew:  changing countenance;  em?  Where t have got into trouble.  Hark!', 'Where  said the Jew, rising with a menacing look.  s the boy?', 'What  said the Jew, seizing the Dodger tightly by the collar, and threatening him with horrid imprecations.   ll throttle you!', 'Will you speak?', 'Why, the traps have got him, and that  said the Dodger, sullenly.    me, will you! s hands, the Dodger snatched up the toasting fork, and made a pass at the merry old gentleman', 'Why, what the blazes is in the wind now! Who pitched that  s well it d have settled somebody.  I might have know s it all about, Fagin?  D--me, if my neck-handkercher an', 'Come in, d', 'Why didn  said the man.   re getting too proud to own me afore company, are you?  Lie down!', 'What are you up to?  Ill-treating the boys, you covetous, avaricious, in-sa-ti-a-ble old fence? I wonder they don d been your  d have done it long ago, and--no, I couldn re fit for nothing but keeping as a curiousity of ugliness in a glass bottle, and I suppose they don', 'I wonder they don d been your  d have done it long ago, and--no, I couldn re fit for nothing but keeping as a curiousity of ugliness in a glass bottle, and I suppose they don', 'Hush! hush! Mr. Sikes, don', 'None of your mistering, you always mean mischief when you come that.  You know my name:  out with it!  I shan', 'Well, well, then--Bill Sikes, You seem out of humour, Bill.', 'You seem out of humour, Bill.', 'Perhaps I am, I should think you was rather out of sorts too, unless you mean as little harm when you throw pewter pots about, as you do when you blab and--', 'Are you mad?', 'And mind you don', 'I  said the Jew, ', 'That  returned Sikes with a malicious grin.  re blowed upon, Fagin.', 'And I  added the Jew, speaking as if he had not noticed the interruption; and regarding the other closely as he did so,-- m afraid that, if the game was up with us, it might be up with a good many more, and that it would come out rather worse for you than it would for me, my dear.', 'Somebody must find out wot', 'If he hasn s no fear till he comes out again, and then he must be taken care on.  You must get hold of him somehow.', 'The very thing! Bet will go; won', 'Wheres?', 'Only just up to the office, my dear,', 'Nancy, my dear, what do YOU say?', 'That it won s no use a-trying it on, Fagin,', 'What do you mean by that?', 'What I say, Bill,', 'Why, you  reasoned Mr. Sikes: ', 'And as I don em to, neither, it', 'She', 'No, she won', 'Yes, she will, Fagin,', 'Stop a minute, my dear, Carry that in one hand.  It looks more respectable, my dear.', 'Give her a door-key to carry in her t  said Sikes; ', 'it looks real and genivine like.', 'Yes, yes, my dear, so it does,', 'There; very good!  Very good indeed, my dear!', 'Oh, my brother!  My poor, dear, sweet, innocent little brother! What has become of him!  Where have they taken him to!  Oh, do have pity, and tell me what', 'Ah, she', 'She  said Mr. Sikes, filling his glass, and smiting the table with his enormous fist.   s her health, and wishing they was all like her!', 'Nolly, dear? Nolly?', 'Well!', 'Is there a little boy here?', 'No, God forbid.', 'I haven', 'Where is he?', 'Why, the gentleman', 'What gentleman!  Oh, gracious heavens!  What gentleman?', 'We must know where he is, my dears; he must be found, Charley, do nothing but skulk about, till you bring home some news of him!  Nancy, my dear, I must have him found.  I trust to you, my dear,--to you and the Artful for everything!  Stay, stay, there ll know where to find me!  Don', 'Me!', 'What now?', 'Is he to be kidnapped to the other ken, Nancy says?', 'Yes, wherever she lays hands on him.  Find him, find him out, that', 'He has not peached so far, If he means to blab us among his new friends, we may stop his mouth yet.', 'If he means to blab us among his new friends, we may stop his mouth yet.', 'Ah! s eyes. ', 'It is gone, you see.', 'I see it is ma  replied Oliver.  ', 'It has been taken down, child, because Mr. Brownlow said, that as it seemed to worry you, perhaps it might prevent your getting well, you know,', 'Oh, no, indeed.  It didn am, I liked to see it.  I quite loved it.', 'Well, well! you get well as fast as ever you can, dear, and it shall be hung up again. There!  I promise you that!  Now, let us talk about something else.', 'Bless us, and save us!  Wash your hands, and let me part your hair nicely for you, child, Dear heart alive!  If we had known he would have asked for you, we would have put you a clean collar on, and made you as smart as sixpence!', 'There are a good many books, are there not, my boy?', 'A great number, sir, I never saw so many.', 'You shall read them, if you behave well, and you will like that, better than looking at the outsides,--that is, some cases; because there are books of which the backs and covers are by far the best parts.', 'I suppose they are those heavy ones, sir,', 'Not always those, there are other equally heavy ones, though of a much smaller size.  How should you like to grow up a clever man, and write books, eh?', 'I think I would rather read them, sir,', 'What! wouldn', 'Well, well, Don t make an author of you, while there', 'Thank you, sir,', 'Now, I want you to pay great attention, my boy, to what I am going to say.  I shall talk to you without any reserve; because I am sure you are well able to understand me, as many older persons would be.', 'Oh, don  exclaimed Oliver, alarmed at the serious tone of the old gentleman Don t send me back to the wretched place I came from.  Have mercy upon a poor boy, sir!', 'My dear child, s sudden appeal; ', 'I never, never will, sir,', 'I hope not, I do not think you ever will.  I have been deceived, before, in the objects whom I have endeavoured to benefit; but I feel strongly disposed to trust you, nevertheless; and I am more interested in your behalf than I can well account for, even to myself.  The persons on whom I have bestowed my dearest love, lie deep in their graves; but, although the happiness and delight of my life lie buried there too, I have not made a coffin of my heart, and sealed it up, forever, on my best affections.  Deep affliction has but strengthened and refined them.', 'Well, well! I only say this, because you have a young heart; and knowing that I have suffered great pain and sorrow, you will be more careful, perhaps, not to wound me again.  You say you are an orphan, without a friend in the world; all the inquiries I have been able to make, confirm the statement.  Let me hear your story; where you come from; who brought you up; and how you got into the company in which I found you.  Speak the truth, and you shall not be friendless while I live.', 'Is he coming up?', 'Yes, sir, He asked if there were any muffins in the house; and, when I told him yes, he said he had come to tea.', 'Shall I go downstairs, sir?', 'No, I would rather you remained here.', 'Look here! do you see this!  Isn t call at a man s friend on the staircase? I ll be content to eat my own head, sir!', 'I  repeated Mr. Grimwig, striking his stick upon the ground.   s that!', 'This is young Oliver Twist, whom we were speaking about,', 'You don s the boy who had the fever, I hope? Wait a minute! Don  continued Mr. Grimwig, abruptly, losing all dread of the fever in his triumph at the discovery;  s the boy who had the orange! If that ll eat my head, and his too.', 'No, no, he has not had one, Come!  Put down your hat; and speak to my young friend.', 'I feel strongly on this subject, sir, There s put there by the surgeon t go to him," I called out of the window, "he', 't go to him," I called out of the window, "he', 'That', 'That', 'How are you, boy?', 'A great deal better, thank you, sir,', 'He is a nice-looking boy, is he not?', 'I don', 'Don', 'No.  I don', 'And which is Oliver?', 'Mealy.  I know a friend who has a beef-faced boy; a fine boy, they call him; with a round head, and red cheeks, and glaring eyes; a horrid boy; with a body and limbs that appear to be swelling out of the seams of his blue clothes; with the voice of a pilot, and the appetite of a wolf.  I know him!  The wretch!', 'Come, these are not the characteristics of young Oliver Twist; so he needn', 'They are not, He may have worse.', 'He may have worse, I say, Where does he come from!  Who is he?  What is he?  He has had a fever.  What of that? Fevers are not peculiar to good people; are they?  Bad people have fevers sometimes; haven t recommended to mercy on that account.  Pooh! nonsense!', 'And when are you going to hear a full, true, and particular account of the life and adventures of Oliver Twist?', 'To-morrow morning, I would rather he was alone with me at the time.  Come up to me to-morrow morning at ten o', 'Yes, sir,', 'I  whispered that gentleman to Mr. Brownlow;  t come up to you to-morrow morning.  I saw him hesitate. He is deceiving you, my good friend.', 'I', 'If he is not, I', 'I s truth with my life!', 'And I for his falsehood with my head!', 'We shall see,', 'We will, we will.', 'Stop the boy, Mrs. Bedwin! there is something to go back.', 'He has gone, sir,', 'Call after him, it', 'Dear me, I am very sorry for that, I particularly wished those books to be returned to-night.', 'Send Oliver with them, he will be sure to deliver them safely, you know.', 'Yes; do let me take them, if you please, sir, I', 'You _shall_ go, my dear, The books are on a chair by my table.  Fetch them down.', 'You are to say, you are to say that you have brought those books back; and that you have come to pay the four pound ten I owe him.  This is a five-pound note, so you will have to bring me back, ten shillings change.', 'I won', 'Bless his sweet face! I can', 'Let me see; he  said Mr. Brownlow, pulling out his watch, and placing it on the table.  ', 'Oh! you really expect him to come back, do you?', 'Don', 'No, I do not. The boy has a new suit of clothes on his back, a set of valuable books under his arm, and a five-pound note in his pocket.  He ll eat my head.', 'Keep quiet, you warmint!  Keep quiet!', 'You would, would you? Come here, you born devil!  Come here!  D', 'What the devil do you come in between me and my dog for?', 'I didn t know,', 'Didn  growled Sikes.  t you hear the noise?', 'Not a sound of it, as I', 'Oh no!  You hear nothing, you don  retorted Sikes with a fierce sneer.  ', 'Why?', 'Cause the government, as cares for the lives of such men as you, as haven  replied Sikes, shutting up the knife with a very expressive look;  s why.', 'that', 'Grin away, grin away.  You s behind a nightcap.  I ll keep it.  There!  If I go, you go; so take care of me.', 'Well, well, my dear, I know all that; we--we--have a mutual interest, Bill,--a mutual interest.', 'Humph, s side than on his.  ', 'It  replied Fagin,  s rather more than it ought to be, my dear; but as I know you', 'Stow that gammon, Where is it? Hand over!', 'Yes, yes, Bill; give me time, give me time, Here it is!  All safe!', 'This is all, is it?', 'All,', 'You haven  inquired Sikes, suspiciously.  t put on an injured look at the question; you', 'Is anybody here, Barney?', 'Dot a shoul,', 'Nobody?', 'Dobody but Biss Dadsy,', 'Nancy! Where?  Strike me blind, if I don ere girl, for her native talents.', 'She', 'Send her here, Send her here.', 'You are on the scent, are you, Nancy?', 'Yes, I am, Bill, and tired enough of it I am, too.  The young brat', 'and tired enough of it I am, too.  The young brat', 'Ah, Nancy, dear!', 'Don  cried Oliver, struggling.  ', 'Oh my gracious! I have found him!  Oh! Oliver! Oliver!  Oh you naughty boy, to make me suffer such distress on your account!  Come home, dear, come.  Oh, I ve found him! s boy with a shiny head of hair anointed with suet, who was also looking on, whether he didn', 'Oh, no, no, never mind, s hand;  m better now.  Come home directly, you cruel boy! Come!', 'I', 'Oh, ma  replied the young woman,  s heart.', 'Young wretch!', 'Go home, do, you little brute,', 'I am not, I don t any sister, or father and mother either.  I', 'Only hear him, how he braves it out!', 'Why, it', 'You see he knows me! He can s good people, or he', 'What the devil  said a man, bursting out of a beer-shop, with a white dog at his heels; ', 'I don t know them.  Help! help!', 'Help! Yes; I', 'That  cried a looker-on, from a garret-window.  s the only way of bringing him to his senses!', 'To be sure!', 'It', 'And he shall have it, too! Come on, you young villain! Here, Bull', 'Do you hear?', 'Give me the other, s unoccupied hand.  s-Eye!', 'Here, Bull', 'See here, boy! s throat;  ye mind!', 'if he speaks ever so soft a word, hold him!  D', 'He t! Now, you know what you un!', 'Now, you know what you un!', 'Eight o', 'What t I!', 'I wonder whether THEY can hear it,', 'Of course they can, It was Bartlemy time when I was shopped; and there warn t hear the squeaking on.  Arter I was locked up for the night, the row and din outside made the thundering old jail so silent, that I could almost have beat my brains out against the iron plates of the door.', 'Poor fellow! Oh, Bill, such fine young chaps as them!', 'Yes; that  answered Sikes.   re as good as dead, so it don', 'Wait a minute! I wouldn clock struck, Bill.  I t a shawl to cover me.', 'And what good would that do? Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yards of good stout rope, you might as well be walking fifty mile off, or not walking at all, for all the good it would do me.  Come on, and don', 'Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yards of good stout rope, you might as well be walking fifty mile off, or not walking at all, for all the good it would do me.  Come on, and don', 'All right,', 'Anybody here?', 'No,', 'Is the old ', 'Yes, and precious down in the mouth he has been. Won', 'Let  said Sikes, ', 'Stand still a moment, and I', 'Oh, my wig, my wig! here he is! oh, cry, here he is!  Oh, Fagin, look at him!  Fagin, do look at him! I can  bear it.  Hold me, somebody, while I laugh it out.', 'Look at his togs, Fagin! Look at his togs! Superfine cloth, and the heavy swell cut!  Oh, my eye, what a game! And his books, too!  Nothing but a gentleman, Fagin!', 'Delighted to see you looking so well, my dear, The Artful shall give you another suit, my dear, for fear you should spoil that Sunday one.  Why didn d have got something warm for supper.', 'Hallo, what  inquired Sikes, stepping forward as the Jew seized the note.   s mine, Fagin.', 'No, no, my dear, Mine, Bill, mine.  You shall have the books.', 'If that ain  said Bill Sikes, putting on his hat with a determined air;  s that is; I', 'Come!  Hand over, will you?', 'This is hardly fair, Bill; hardly fair, is it, Nancy?', 'Fair, or not fair, hand over, I tell you! Do you think Nancy and me has got nothing else to do with our precious time but to spend it in scouting arter, and kidnapping, every young boy as gets grabbed through you?  Give it here, you avaricious old skeleton, give it here!', 'That  said Sikes;  re fond of reading. If you ain em.', 'They  said Charley Bates: who, with sundry grimaces, had been affecting to read one of the volumes in question;  t is, Oliver?', 'They belong to the old gentleman, to the good, kind, old gentleman who took me into his house, and had me nursed, when I was near dying of the fever. Oh, pray send them back; send him back the books and money.  Keep me here all my life long; but pray, pray send them back.  He', 'to the good, kind, old gentleman who took me into his house, and had me nursed, when I was near dying of the fever. Oh, pray send them back; send him back the books and money.  Keep me here all my life long; but pray, pray send them back.  He', 'The boy  remarked Fagin, looking covertly round, and knitting his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot.   re right, Oliver, you em.  Ha! ha! it couldn', 'Of course it couldn  replied Sikes;  d that, directly I see him coming through Clerkenwell, with the books under his arm.  It re soft-hearted psalm-singers, or they wouldn ll ask no questions after him, fear they should be obliged to prosecute, and so get him lagged.  He', 'Keep back the dog, Bill! Keep back the dog; he', 'Serve him right! s grasp.   ll split your head against the wall.', 'I don t care for that, the child shan', 'Shan  said Sikes, setting his teeth.   ll soon do that, if you don', 'What', 'The girl', 'No, she hasn  said Nancy, pale and breathless from the scuffle;  t, Fagin; don', 'no, she hasn t think it.', 'Then keep quiet, will you?', 'No, I won  replied Nancy, speaking very loud. ', 'Come!  What do you think of that?', 'So you wanted to get away, my dear, did you? eh?', 'Wanted to get assistance; called for the police; did you? We', 'I won  cried the girl.  ve got the boy, and what more would you have?--Let him be--let him be--or I shall put that mark on some of you, that will bring me to the gallows before my time.', 'Why, Nancy! you,--you', 'Am I! Take care I don', 'What do you mean by this? what do you mean by it?  Burn my body!  Do you know who you are, and what you are?', 'Oh, yes, I know all about it,', 'Well, then, keep quiet, or I', 'You  added Sikes, as he surveyed her with a contemptuous air, ', 'God Almighty help me, I am! and I wish I had been struck dead in the street, or had changed places with them we passed so near to-night, before I had lent a hand in bringing him here.  He s bad, from this night forth.  Isn', 'Come, come, Sikes, we must have civil words; civil words, Bill.', 'Civil words! Civil words, you villain!  Yes, you deserve   pointing to Oliver.  t you know it?  Speak out!  Don', 'Civil words, you villain!  Yes, you deserve   pointing to Oliver.  t you know it?  Speak out!  Don', 'I have been in the same trade, and in the same service, for twelve years since.  Don t you know it?', 'Well, well, and, if you have, it', 'Aye, it is! It is my living; and the cold, wet, dirty streets are my home; and you ll keep me there, day and night, day and night, till I die!', 'I shall do you a mischief! a mischief worse than that, if you say much more!', 'She  said Sikes, laying her down in a corner.  s uncommon strong in the arms, when she', 'It  said the Jew, replacing his club;  re clever, and we can em.  Charley, show Oliver to bed.', 'I suppose he', 'Certainly not,', 'Put off the smart ones, and I em to Fagin to take care of.  What fun it is!', 'Drat that beadle! If it isn', 'Mrs. Mann, Mrs. Mann, ma', 'Well, and good morning to _you_, sir, and hoping you find yourself well, sir!', 'So-so, Mrs. Mann, A porochial life is not a bed of roses, Mrs. Mann.', 'Ah, that it isn', 'A porochial life, ma  continued Mr. Bumble, striking the table with his cane, ', 'Ah!  You may well sigh, Mrs. Mann!', 'Mrs. Mann, I am going to London.', 'Lauk, Mr. Bumble!', 'To London, ma  resumed the inflexible beadle, ', 'whether the Clerkinwell Sessions will not find themselves in the wrong box before they have done with me.', 'Oh! you mustn', 'The Clerkinwell Sessions have brought it upon themselves, ma  replied Mr. Bumble; ', 'You', 'That re ill, Mrs. Mann, We put the sick paupers into open carts in the rainy weather, to prevent their taking cold.', 'Oh!', 'The opposition coach contracts for these two; and takes them cheap, They are both in a very low state, and we find it would come two pound cheaper to move  em--that is, if we can throw  t die upon the road to spite us.  Ha! ha! ha!', 'We are forgetting business, ma  said the beadle; ', 'It  said the farmer of infants;  s formal enough, I dare say.  Thank you, Mr. Bumble, sir, I am very much obliged to you, I', 'Bless their dear little hearts! they', 'Isn', 'He  said Mr. Bumble angrily.  ', 'I  replied Mrs. Mann. ', 'Can', 'What', 'Nothing, sir,', 'I should think not,', 'You want for nothing, I', 'I should like--', 'Hey-day! I suppose you', 'Stop, Mrs. Mann, stop! Like what, sir, eh?', 'I should like, if somebody that can write, would put a few words down for me on a piece of paper, and fold it up and seal it, and keep it for me, after I am laid in the ground.', 'Why, what does the boy mean? What do you mean, sir?', 'I should like, to leave my dear love to poor Oliver Twist; and to let him know how often I have sat by myself and cried to think of his wandering about in the dark nights with nobody to help him.  And I should like to tell him, that I was glad to die when I was very young; for, perhaps, if I had lived to be a man, and had grown old, my little sister who is in Heaven, might forget me, or be unlike me; and it would be so much happier if we were both children there together.', 'They', 'I couldn  said Mrs Mann, holding up her hands, and looking malignantly at Dick.  ', 'Take him away, ma  said Mr. Bumble imperiously.  ', 'I hope the gentleman will understand that it isn', 'They shall understand that, ma  said Mr. Bumble.   t bear the sight on him.', 'Whereas a young boy, named Oliver Twist, absconded, or was enticed, on Thursday evening last, from his home, at Pentonville; and has not since been heard of.  The above reward will be paid to any person who will give such information as will lead to the discovery of the said Oliver Twist, or tend to throw any light upon his previous history, in which the advertiser is, for many reasons, warmly interested.', 'Is Mr. Brownlow at home?', 'Come in, come in, I knew we should hear of him. Poor dear!  I knew we should!  I was certain of it.  Bless his heart! I said so all along.', 'A beadle.  A parish beadle, or I', 'Pray don  said Mr. Brownlow.  ', 'Now, sir, you come in consequence of having seen the advertisement?', 'Yes, sir,', 'And you ARE a beadle, are you not?', 'I am a porochial beadle, gentlemen,', 'Of course, I knew he was. A beadle all over!', 'Do you know where this poor boy is now?', 'No more than nobody,', 'Well, what DO you know of him? Speak out, my friend, if you have anything to say.  What DO you know of him?', 'You don  said Mr. Grimwig, caustically; after an attentive perusal of Mr. Bumble', 'You see?', 'I fear it is all too true, This is not much for your intelligence; but I would gladly have given you treble the money, if it had been favourable to the boy.', 'Mrs. Bedwin, that boy, Oliver, is an imposter.', 'It can', 'I tell you he is, What do you mean by can', 'I never will believe it, sir, Never!', 'You old women never believe anything but quack-doctors, and lying story-books, I knew it all along. Why didn t had a fever, I suppose, eh?  He was interesting, wasn', 'He was a dear, grateful, gentle child, sir, I know what children are, sir; and have done these forty years; and people who can t say anything about them.  That', 'Silence! Never let me hear the boy', 'What a pity it is he isn', 'Ah! he don s good for him.', 'I suppose you don', 'I think I know that, It re one, are you not?', 'I am, I', 'I am, So s Fagin. So s Nancy.  So s the downiest one of the lot!', 'And the least given to peaching,', 'He wouldn', 'Not a bit of it,', 'He t he look fierce at any strange cove that laughs or sings when he  pursued the Dodger.  t he growl at all, when he hears a fiddle playing!  And don t of his breed!  Oh, no!', 'He', 'Well, well, This hasn', 'No more it has, Why don', 'And make your fortun', 'And so be able to retire on your property, and do the gen-teel: as I mean to, in the very next leap-year but four that ever comes, and the forty-second Tuesday in Trinity-week,', 'I don  rejoined Oliver, timidly; ', 'And Fagin would RATHER not!', 'Go! Why, where  Don', 'Oh, blow that! that', 'that', '_I_ couldn', 'You can leave your friends, though, and let them be punished for what you did.', 'and let them be punished for what you did.', 'That, That was all out of consideration for Fagin,  t made our lucky; that was the move, wasn', 'Look here! Here s the odds where it comes from? Here, catch hold; there t, won', 'It t it, Oliver? He t he?', 'I don', 'Something in this way, old feller,', 'That  said Charley.  ', 'You  said the Dodger, surveying his boots with much satisfaction when Oliver had polished them.  ll be the first he ever had that turned out unprofitable.  You ll come to the trade long before you think of it; and you', 'And always put this in your pipe, Nolly, if you don', 'What  interposed Master Bates;  t know what you mean.', 'If you don  said the Dodger, reducing his conversation to the level of Oliver some other cove will; so that the coves that lose  ll be all the worse, too, and nobody half a ha orth the better, except the chaps wot gets them--and you', 'To be sure, to be sure! It all lies in a nutshell my dear; in a nutshell, take the Dodger', 'time wished he might be busted if he warn', 'Where do you think the gentleman has come from, Oliver?', 'I--I--don', 'Who', 'A young friend of mine, my dear,', 'He  said the young man, with a meaning look at Fagin.  un; you ll bet a crown!', 'Never mind where I came from, young  ll find your way there, soon enough, I', 'Only me, Bill; only me, my dear,', 'Bring in your body then, Lie down, you stupid brute! Don s got a great-coat on?', 'Well!', 'Well, my dear, Ah! Nancy.', 'It is cold, Nancy dear, It seems to go right through one,', 'It must be a piercer, if it finds its way through your heart, Give him something to drink, Nancy.  Burn my body, make haste!  It', 'Quite enough, quite, thankye, Bill,', 'What!  You  inquired Sikes, fixing his eyes on the Jew.  ', 'There, Now I', 'For business?', 'For business, so say what you', 'About the crib at Chertsey, Bill?', 'Yes.  Wot about it?', 'Ah! you know what I mean, my dear, He knows what I mean, Nancy; don', 'No, he don  sneered Mr. Sikes.   t, and that t sit there, winking and blinking, and talking to me in hints, as if you warn ye mean?', 'Hush, Bill, hush! somebody will hear us, my dear. Somebody will hear us.', 'Let   said Sikes;  t care.', 'There, there, It was only my caution, nothing more.  Now, my dear, about that crib at Chertsey; when is it to be done, Bill, eh?  When is it to be done?  Such plate, my dear, such plate!', 'Not at all,', 'Not to be done at all!', 'No, not at all, At least it can', 'Then it hasn  said the Jew, turning pale with anger.   t tell me!', 'But I will tell you, Who are you that t get one of the servants in line.', 'Do you mean to tell me, Bill, that neither of the two men in the house can be got over?', 'Yes, I do mean to tell you so, The old lady has had  em five hundred pound, they wouldn', 'em these twenty years; and if you were to give  t be in it.', 'But do you mean to say, my dear, that the women can', 'Not a bit of it,', 'Not by flash Toby Crackit? Think what women are, Bill,', 'No; not even by flash Toby Crackit, He says he s been loitering down there, and it', 'He should have tried mustachios and a pair of military trousers, my dear,', 'So he did, and they warn', 'And yet, it', 'So it is, Worse luck!', 'Fagin, is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it', 'is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it', 'Yes,', 'Is it a bargain?', 'Yes, my dear, yes,', 'Then, s hand, with some disdain,  s barred up at night like a jail; but there', 'let it come off as soon as you like.  Toby and me were over the garden-wall the night afore last, sounding the panels of the door and shutters.  The crib s one part we can crack, safe and softly.', 'Which is that, Bill?', 'Why, as you cross the lawn--', 'Yes?', 'Umph! s face.   t do it without me, I know; but it', 'As you like, my dear, as you like Is there no help wanted, but yours and Toby', 'None, Cept a centre-bit and a boy.  The first we', 'A boy! Oh! then it', 'Never mind wot it is! I want a boy, and he musn un.  Lord! if I s!  He kept him small on purpose, and let him out by the job.  But the father gets lagged; and then the Juvenile Delinquent Society comes, and takes the boy away from a trade where he was earning money, teaches him to read and write, and in time makes a   said Mr. Sikes, his wrath rising with the recollection of his wrongs,  d got money enough (which it t,) we shouldn', 'No more we should, Bill!', 'What now?', 'You don', 'I tell you I do!', 'Nonsense, Go on, Fagin.  I know what he t mind me.', 'Why, you don  he asked at length.  ve known her long enough to trust her, or the Devil t one to blab.  Are you Nancy?', 'You s in it.  She ain', '_I_ should think not!', 'No, no, my dear, I know you  said the Jew; ', 'But wot?', 'I didn t p aps be out of sorts, you know, my dear, as she was the other night,', 'Now, Fagin, Tell Bill at once, about Oliver!', 'Ha! you  said the Jew, patting her on the neck.  ', 'What about him?', 'He', 'He!', 'Have him, Bill! I would, if I was in your place. He mayn s not what you want, if he s a safe one, Bill.', 'I know he is, He s time he began to work for his bread.  Besides, the others are all too big.', 'Well, he is just the size I want,', 'And will do everything you want, Bill, my dear, he can', 'he can', 'Frighten him! It s anything queer about him when we once get into the work; in for a penny, in for a pound.  You won', 'I  said the Jew with energy.  ve--I s ours!  Ours for his life.  Oho!  It couldn', 'Ours! Yours, you mean.', 'Perhaps I do, my dear, Mine, if you like, Bill.', 'And wot, wot makes you take so much pains about one chalk-faced kid, when you know there are fifty boys snoozing about Common Garden every night, as you might pick and choose from?', 'Because they  replied the Jew, with some confusion,  em when they get into trouble, and I lose  t with twenty of them.  Besides, he has us now if he could only give us leg-bail again; and he must be in the same boat with us.  Never mind how he came there; it s all I want.  Now, how much better this is, than being obliged to put the poor leetle boy out of the way--which would be dangerous, and we should lose by it besides.', 'When is it to be done?', 'Ah, to be sure, when is it to be done, Bill?', 'I planned with Toby, the night arter to-morrow, if he heerd nothing from me to the contrairy.', 'Good, there', 'No,', 'It', 'And about--', 'Oh, ah, it  rejoined Sikes, interrupting him.  d better bring the boy here to-morrow night.  I shall get off the stone an hour arter daybreak.  Then you hold your tongue, and keep the melting-pot ready, and that ll have to do.', 'Good-night, Nancy,', 'Good-night.', 'Always the way! The worst of these women is, that a very little thing serves to call up some long-forgotten feeling; and, the best of them is, that it never lasts.  Ha! ha!  The man against the child, for a bag of gold!', 'The worst of these women is, that a very little thing serves to call up some long-forgotten feeling; and, the best of them is, that it never lasts.  Ha! ha!  The man against the child, for a bag of gold!', 'Is Oliver a-bed?  I want to speak to him,', 'Hours ago, Here he is!', 'Not now, To-morrow. To-morrow.', 'To--to--stop there, sir?', 'No, no, my dear.  Not to stop there, We shouldn t be afraid, Oliver, you shall come back to us again.  Ha! ha! ha!  We won', 'I suppose, you want to know what you s for---eh, my dear?', 'Why, do you think?', 'Indeed I don', 'Bah! s face.  ', 'You may burn a candle, And here', 'And here', 'Good-night!', 'Take heed, Oliver! take heed! He', 'What  he cried, starting up, and catching sight of a figure standing by the door.   s there?', 'Me.  Only me,', 'Put down the light, It hurts my eyes.', 'God forgive me! I never thought of this.', 'Has anything happened? Can I help you?  I will if I can.  I will, indeed.', 'Nancy! What is it?', 'I don  said she, affecting to busy herself in arranging her dress;  s this damp dirty room, I think.  Now, Nolly, dear, are you ready?', 'Am I to go with you?', 'Yes.  I have come from Bill, You are to go with me.', 'What for?', 'What for? s face.  ', 'I don', 'Have it your own way, For no good, then.', 'Hush! You can', 'I have saved you from being ill-used once, and I will again, and I do now, for those who would have fetched you, if I had not, would have been far more rough than me.  I have promised for your being quiet and silent; if you are not, you will only do harm to yourself and me too, and perhaps be my death.  See here!  I have borne all this for you already, as true as God sees me show it.', 'Remember this!  And don t mean to harm you; whatever they make you do, is no fault of yours.  Hush! Every word from you is a blow for me.  Give me your hand.  Make haste! Your hand!', 'This way, Bill!', 'Bill!', 'Hallo! Oh!  That', 'Bull s gone home with Tom, He', 'That', 'So you', 'Yes, here he is,', 'Did he come quiet?', 'Like a lamb,', 'I  said Sikes, looking grimly at Oliver;  un; and let me read you a lectur', 'Now, first:  do you know wot this is?', 'Well, then, look here, This is powder; that  s a bullet; and this is a little bit of a old hat for waddin', 'Now it', 'Yes, I see it is, sir,', 'Well, s wrist, and putting the barrel so close to his temple that they touched; at which moment the boy could not repress a start;  re out o', 'As near as I know, there isn t take this devil-and-all of trouble to explain matters to you, if it warn ye hear me?', 'The short and the long of what you mean, is, that if you ll prevent his ever telling tales afterwards, by shooting him through the head, and will take your chance of swinging for it, as you do for a great many other things in the way of business, every month of your life.', 'That  observed Mr. Sikes, approvingly;  s blowing up; and then they lengthens it out.  And now that he s have some supper, and get a snooze before starting.', 'Now, then! half-past five! Look sharp, or you s late as it is.', 'Now, young   said Sikes, looking up at the clock of St. Andrew hard upon seven! you must step out.  Come, don', 'Jump up, Is that your boy?', 'Yes; he', 'Your father walks rather too quick for you, don', 'Not a bit of it, He', 'Good-bye, boy,', 'He  replied Sikes, giving him a shake;  s sulky.  A young dog!  Don', 'Not I! It', 'So, you', 'Yes, I am, and not slow about it neither.  My horse hasn ; and he won s luck to him. Ecod! he un!', 'Could you give my boy and me a lift as far as there?', 'If you  replied the man, looking out of the pot.  ', 'Going on to Shepperton,', 'I  replied the other.  ', 'Yes, the other gentleman', 'I say! that won', 'Why not? You s to prevent my standing treat for a pint or so, in return?', 'The water! He has brought me to this lonely place to murder me!', 'Hallo!', 'Don  said Sikes, bolting the door.  ', 'Aha! my pal! A glim, Barney, a glim! Show the gentleman in, Barney; wake up first, if convenient.', 'Do you hear? There', 'Bister Sikes! cub id, sir; cub id.', 'Here! you get on first, Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels.', 'Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels.', 'Bill, my boy! I d given it up:  in which case I should have made a personal wentur.  Hallo!', 'I d given it up:  in which case I should have made a personal wentur.  Hallo!', 'The boy.  Only the boy!', 'Wud of Bister Fagid', 'Fagin  exclaimed Toby, looking at Oliver.   ll make, for the old ladies  to him.', 'There--there', 'Now, if you re waiting, you ll have to go out with us again to-night, though not very far off.', 'Here, Success to the crack!', 'A drain for the boy, Down with it, innocence.', 'Indeed, s face; ', 'indeed, I--', 'Down with it! Do you think I don s good for you?  Tell him to drink it, Bill.', 'He had better! Burn my body, if he isn', 'Barkers for me, Barney,', 'Here they are, You loaded them yourself.', 'All right! The persuaders?', 'I em,', 'Crape, keys, centre-bits, darkies--nothing forgotten?', 'All right, Bring them bits of timber, Barney.  That', 'Now then!', 'Take his other hand, Toby, Look out, Barney.', 'Slap through the town, there', 'The boy next, Hoist him up; I', 'Get up! Get up, or I', 'Oh! for God  cried Oliver; ', 'Hush! it won ll do your business myself with a crack on the head.  That makes no noise, and is quite as certain, and more genteel.  Here, Bill, wrench the shutter open.  He ll engage.  I', 'Now listen, you young limb, s face;  m a going to put you through there.  Take this light; go softly up the steps straight afore you, and along the little hall, to the street door; unfasten it, and let us in.', 'There t be able to reach, Stand upon one of the hall chairs.  There are three there, Bill, with a jolly large blue unicorn and gold pitchfork on  s arms.', 'Keep quiet, can  replied Sikes, with a threatening look. ', 'Wide, The game of that is, that they always leave it open with a catch, so that the dog, who ticed him away to-night.  So neat!', 'Take this lantern, You see the stairs afore you?', 'It  said Sikes, in the same low whisper. ', 'What', 'Nothing, Now!', 'Come back! Back! back!', 'Clasp your arm tighter, Give me a shawl here.  They', 'Well! I', 'Drat the pot! a little stupid thing, that only holds a couple of cups! What use is it of, to anybody!  Except, except to a poor desolate creature like me.  Oh dear!', 'except to a poor desolate creature like me.  Oh dear!', 'I shall never get another! I shall never get another--like him.', 'Oh, come in with you! Some of the old women dying, I suppose.  They always die when I t stand there, letting the cold air in, don s amiss now, eh?', 'Nothing, ma  replied a man', 'Dear me! is that Mr. Bumble?', 'At your service, ma  said Mr. Bumble, who had been stopping outside to rub his shoes clean, and to shake the snow off his coat; and who now made his appearance, bearing the cocked hat in one hand and a bundle in the other.   am?', 'Hard weather, Mr. Bumble,', 'Hard, indeed, ma  replied the beadle.   am.  We have given away, Mrs. Corney, we have given away a matter of twenty quartern loaves and a cheese and a half, this very blessed afternoon; and yet them paupers are not contented.', 'Of course not.  When would they be, Mr. Bumble?', 'When, indeed, ma  rejoined Mr. Bumble.   s one man that, in consideration of his wife and large family, has a quartern loaf and a good pound of cheese, full weight.  Is he grateful, ma s worth of it!  What does he do, ma s only a pocket handkerchief full, he says!  Coals! What would he do with coals?  Toast his cheese with  s the way with these people, ma em a apron full of coals to-day, and they', 'I never, see anything like the pitch it am, and I may mention it to you--a man, with hardly a rag upon his back (here Mrs. Corney looked at the floor), goes to our overseer t go away, and shocked the company very much, our overseer sent him out a pound of potatoes and half a pint of oatmeal.  "My heart!" says the ungrateful villain, "what em away again, "you won ll die in the streets!" says the vagrant.  "Oh no, you won', 't get anything else here."  "Then I t," says our overseer.', 'Ha! ha!  That was very good!  So like Mr. Grannett, wasn  interposed the matron.  ', 'Well, ma  rejoined the beadle,  s a obstinate pauper for you!', 'It beats anything I could have believed, But don re a gentleman of experience, and ought to know.  Come.', 'Mrs. Corney, out-of-door relief, properly managed: properly managed, ma t want; and then they get tired of coming.', 'Dear me! Well, that is a good one, too!', 'Yes.  Betwixt you and me, ma  returned Mr. Bumble,  s the great principle; and that ll always observe that sick families have been relieved with slices of cheese.  That  said the beadle, stopping to unpack his bundle,  am; not to be spoken of; except, as I may say, among the porochial officers, such as ourselves. This is the port wine, ma', 'You', 'It blows, ma  replied Mr. Bumble, turning up his coat-collar,  s ears off.', 'enough to cut one', 'Sweet?  Mr. Bumble?', 'Very sweet, indeed, ma', 'You have a cat, ma  said Mr. Bumble, glancing at one who, in the centre of her family, was basking before the fire; ', 'I am so fond of them, Mr. Bumble, you can  replied the matron.   re _so_ happy, _so_ frolicsome, and _so_ cheerful, that they are quite companions for me.', 'Very nice animals, ma  replied Mr. Bumble, approvingly; ', 'Oh, yes! so fond of their home too, that it m sure.', 'Mrs. Corney, ma  said Mr. Bumble, slowly, and marking the time with his teaspoon,  am; that any cat, or kitten, that could live with you, ma am.', 'Oh, Mr. Bumble!', 'It am, I would drown it myself, with pleasure.', 'Then you  said the matron vivaciously, as she held out her hand for the beadle and a very hard-hearted man besides.', 'Hard-hearted, ma  said Mr. Bumble.     Mr. Bumble resigned his cup without another word; squeezed Mrs. Corney', 'Hard-hearted, Mrs. Corney? s face; ', 'Dear me! what a very curious question from a single man.  What can you want to know for, Mr. Bumble?', 'Mr. Bumble! Mr. Bumble, I shall scream!', 'If you please, mistress, Old Sally is a-going fast.', 'Well, what  angrily demanded the matron.   t keep her alive, can I?', 'No, no, mistress, nobody can; she ve seen a many people die; little babes and great strong men; and I know when death s troubled in her mind: and when the fits are not on her,--and that ll never die quiet till you come, mistress.', 'Cold night, Mrs. Corney,', 'Very cold, indeed, sir,', 'You should get better coals out of your contractors, s deputy, breaking a lump on the top of the fire with the rusty poker; ', 'They s choosing, sir, The least they could do, would be to keep us pretty warm:  for our places are hard enough.', 'Oh! it', 'It is, is it, sir?', 'If she lasts a couple of hours, I shall be surprised, s apprentice, intent upon the toothpick It', 'Then perhaps she t make a row, Put the light on the floor.  She won', 'Did she say any more, Anny dear, while I was gone?', 'Not a word, She plucked and tore at her arms for a little time; but I held her hands, and she soon dropped off.  She hasn t so weak for an old woman, although I am on parish allowance; no, no!', 'Did she drink the hot wine the doctor said she was to have?', 'I tried to get it down, But her teeth were tight set, and she clenched the mug so hard that it was as much as I could do to get it back again.  So I drank it; and it did me good!', 'I mind the time, when she would have done the same, and made rare fun of it afterwards.', 'Ay, that she would, she had a merry heart. ', 'Not long, mistress, We have none of us long to wait for Death.  Patience, patience! He', 'Hold your tongue, you doting idiot! You, Martha, tell me; has she been in this way before?', 'Often,', 'But will never be again, that is, she t be for long!', 'Long or short, she won s no part of my duty to see all the old women in the house die, and I won s more. Mind that, you impudent old harridans. If you make a fool of me again, I', 'Who', 'Hush, hush! Lie down, lie down!', 'I  said the woman, struggling. ', 'Turn them away, make haste! make haste!', 'Now listen to me, In this very room--in this very bed--I once nursed a pretty young creetur', 'Never mind the year, what about her?', 'Ay, what about her?--what about--I know! I robbed her, so I did!  She wasn t cold, when I stole it!', 'what about her?--what about--I know! I robbed her, so I did!  She wasn t cold, when I stole it!', 'Stole what, for God', '_It_! s mouth. ', 'Gold! Go on, go on--yes--what of it?  Who was the mother? When was it?', 'She charge me to keep it safe, and trusted me as the only woman about her.  I stole it in my heart when she first showed it me hanging round her neck; and the child', 'Known what? Speak!', 'The boy grew so like his mother, that I could never forget it when I saw his face.  Poor girl! poor girl!  She was so young, too! Such a gentle lamb!  Wait; there', 'No, no, Be quick, or it may be too late!', 'The mother, the mother, when the pains of death first came upon her, whispered in my ear that if her baby was born alive, and thrived, the day might come when it would not feel so much disgraced to hear its poor young mother named. "And oh, kind Heaven!" she said, folding her thin hands together, "whether it be boy or girl, raise up some friends for it in this troubled world, and take pity upon a lonely desolate child, abandoned to its mercy!"', 'the mother, when the pains of death first came upon her, whispered in my ear that if her baby was born alive, and thrived, the day might come when it would not feel so much disgraced to hear its poor young mother named. "And oh, kind Heaven!" she said, folding her thin hands together, "whether it be boy or girl, raise up some friends for it in this troubled world, and take pity upon a lonely desolate child, abandoned to its mercy!"', 'The boy', 'They _called_ him Oliver, The gold I stole was--', 'Yes, yes--what?', 'Stone dead!', 'And nothing to tell, after all,', 'That  said Mr. Chitling, with a very long face, as he drew half-a-crown from his waistcoat-pocket.   ve good cards, Charley and I can em.', 'Matter, Fagin! I wish you had watched the play. Tommy Chitling hasn', 'Ay, ay! Try  em again.', 'No more of it for me, thank   replied Mr. Chitling;  ve had enough.  That  s no standing again', 'Ha! ha! my dear, you must get up very early in the morning, to win against the Dodger.', 'Morning! you must put your boots on over-night, and have a telescope at each eye, and a opera-glass between your shoulders, if you want to come over him.', 'How precious dull you are, Tommy! What do you think he', 'How should I know, my dear? About his losses, maybe; or the little retirement in the country that he', 'Not a bit of it, What do _you_ say, Charley?', '_I_ should say, that he was uncommon sweet upon Betsy.  See how he s a merry-go-rounder!  Tommy Chitling', 'Never mind him, my dear, Betsy', 'Betsy', 'What I mean to say, Fagin, is, that that isn', 'No more it is, Charley will talk.  Don t mind him.  Betsy', 'So I _do_ do as she bids me, I shouldn t been for her advice.  But it turned out a good job for you; didn s six weeks of it?  It must come, some time or another, and why not in the winter time when you don', 'Ah, to be sure, my dear,', 'You wouldn  asked the Dodger, winking upon Charley and the Jew, ', 'I mean to say that I shouldn  replied Tom, angrily.  ll say as much as that, I should like to know; eh, Fagin?', 'Nobody, my dear, not a soul, Tom.  I don em that would do it besides you; not one of ', 'I might have got clear off, if I t I, Fagin? A word from me would have done it; wouldn', 'To be sure it would, my dear,', 'But I didn', 'No, no, to be sure, you were too stout-hearted for that.  A deal too stout, my dear!', 'Perhaps I was, and if I was, what', 'Hark! I heard the tinkler.', 'What! alone?', 'Where is he?', 'Yes, bring him down. Hush! Quiet, Charley!  Gently, Tom!  Scarce, scarce!', 'How are you, Faguey? Pop that shawl away in my castor, Dodger, so that I may know where to find it when I cut; that ll be a fine young cracksman afore the old file now.', 'See there, Faguey, not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when; not a bubble of blacking, by Jove!   But don t talk about business till I s have a quiet fill-out for the first time these three days!', 'not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when; not a bubble of blacking, by Jove!   But don t talk about business till I s have a quiet fill-out for the first time these three days!', 'First and foremost, Faguey,', 'Yes, yes!', 'First and foremost, Faguey, how', 'What!', 'Why, you don', 'Mean! Where are they?  Sikes and the boy!  Where are they?  Where have they been? Where are they hiding?  Why have they not been here?', 'The crack failed,', 'I know it, What more?', 'They fired and hit the boy.  We cut over the fields at the back, with him between us--straight as the crow flies--through hedge and ditch. They gave chase.  Damme! the whole country was awake, and the dogs upon us.', 'The boy!', 'Bill had him on his back, and scudded like the wind.  We stopped to take him between us; his head hung down, and he was cold. They were close upon our heels; every man for himself, and each from the gallows! We parted company, and left the youngster lying in a ditch.  Alive or dead, that', 'Why, the sight of you, Mr. Fagin, would cure the hoptalmy!', 'The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively,', 'Well, I  replied the trader;  t you find it so?', 'At the Cripples?', 'Let me see,', 'Yes, there em gone in, that I knows. I don s there.', 'Sikes is not, I suppose?', '_Non istwentus_, as the lawyers say, Have you got anything in my line to-night?', 'Nothing to-night,', 'Are you going up to the Cripples, Fagin? Stop!  I don', 'What can I do for you, Mr. Fagin? Won ll be delighted, every one of ', 'No,', 'And no news of Barney?', 'None, He won s all safe.  Depend on it, they d blow upon the thing at once.  He ll pound it, that Barney', 'Will _he_ be here to-night?', 'Monks, do you mean?', 'Hush! Yes.', 'Certain, I expected him here before now.  If you ll be--', 'No, no, Tell him I came here to see him; and that he must come to me to-night.  No, say to-morrow.  As he is not here, to-morrow will be time enough.', 'Good! Nothing more?', 'Not a word now,', 'I say, what a time this would be for a sell!  I', 'Ah!  But it s time,', 'Phil has something more to do, before we can afford to part with him; so go back to the company, my dear, and tell them to lead merry lives--_while they last_.  Ha! ha! ha!', 'Now, if there is any deep play here, I shall have it out of you, my girl, cunning as you are.', 'She has been drinking, or perhaps she is only miserable.', 'And where should you think Bill was now, my dear?', 'And the boy, too, Poor leetle child!  Left in a ditch, Nance; only think!', 'The child, is better where he is, than among us; and if no harm comes to Bill from it, I hope he lies dead in the ditch and that his young bones may rot there.', 'What!', 'Ay, I do, I shall be glad to have him away from my eyes, and to know that the worst is over.  I can', 'Pooh! You', 'Am I? It d never have me anything else, if you had your will, except now;--the humour doesn t it?', 'No! It does not.', 'Change it, then!', 'Change it! s unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the night,  s throat between my fingers now.  If he comes back, and leaves the boy behind him; if he gets off free, and dead or alive, fails to restore him to me; murder him yourself if you would have him escape Jack Ketch.  And do it the moment he sets foot in this room, or mind me, it will be too late!', 'What is all this?', 'What is it? When the boy', 'Nancy, dear! Did you mind me, dear?', 'Don  replied the girl, raising her head languidly.   t he won', 'Regarding this boy, my dear?', 'The boy must take his chance with the rest, and I say again, I hope he is dead, and out of harm s pretty sure to be safe; for Bill', 'And about what I was saying, my dear?', 'Your must say it all over again, if it  rejoined Nancy;  m stupid again.', 'Fagin!', 'Ah! is that--', 'Yes! I have been lingering here these two hours.  Where the devil have you been?', 'On your business, my dear, On your business all night.', 'Oh, of course! Well; and what', 'Nothing good,', 'Nothing bad, I hope?', 'It  said the man, groping forward a few steps. ', 'Make haste!', 'Shut the door,', 'That wasn  said the other man, feeling his way. ', 'We can say the few words we  said the Jew, throwing open a door on the first floor;  ll set the candle on the stairs.  There!', 'I tell you again, it was badly planned.  Why not have kept him here among the rest, and made a sneaking, snivelling pickpocket of him at once?', 'Only hear him!', 'Why, do you mean to say you couldn  demanded Monks, sternly.   t you done it, with other boys, scores of times?  If you had had patience for a twelvemonth, at most, couldn', 'Whose turn would that have served, my dear?', 'Mine,', 'But not mine, He might have become of use to me.  When there are two parties to a bargain, it is only reasonable that the interests of both should be consulted; is it, my good friend?', 'What then?', 'I saw it was not easy to train him to the business, he was not like other boys in the same circumstances.', 'he was not like other boys in the same circumstances.', 'Curse him, no! or he would have been a thief, long ago.', 'I had no hold upon him to make him worse, His hand was not in.  I had nothing to frighten him with; which we always must have in the beginning, or we labour in vain.  What could I do?  Send him out with the Dodger and Charley?  We had enough of that, at first, my dear; I trembled for us all.', '_That_ was not my doing,', 'No, no, my dear! And I don', 'Throttle the girl!', 'Why, we can  replied the Jew, smiling;  ll care no more for him, than for a block of wood.  You want him made a thief.  If he is alive, I can make him one from this time; and, if--if-- it', 'It  interposed the other man, with a look of terror, and clasping the Jew Mind that.  Fagin!  I had no hand in it.  Anything but his death, I told you from the first.  I won s always found out, and haunts a man besides.  If they shot him dead, I was not the cause; do you hear me?  Fire this infernal den!  What', 'What! Where?', 'Yonder! replied the man, glaring at the opposite wall.  ', 'It', 'I  replied Monks, trembling.  ', 'What do you think now? Besides ourselves, there re safe enough. See here!', 'Mrs. Corney, what is this, ma am?  Pray answer me: I  Mr. Bumble, in his alarm, could not immediately think of the word   so he said ', 'Oh, Mr. Bumble! I have been so dreadfully put out!', 'Put out, ma  exclaimed Mr. Bumble;   said Mr. Bumble, checking himself, with native majesty, ', 'It', 'Then _don am,', 'I can', 'Then take something, ma  said Mr. Bumble soothingly.  ', 'Not for the world! I couldn   Uttering these words, the good lady pointed, distractedly, to the cupboard, and underwent a convulsion from internal spasms.  Mr. Bumble rushed to the closet; and, snatching a pint green-glass bottle from the shelf thus incoherently indicated, filled a tea-cup with its contents, and held it to the lady', 'I', 'Peppermint, Try it!  There', 'It', 'Very much so indeed, ma', 'Nothing, I am a foolish, excitable, weak creetur.', 'Not weak, ma  retorted Mr. Bumble, drawing his chair a little closer.  ', 'We are all weak creeturs,', 'So we are,', 'We are all weak creeturs,', 'Don', 'I can', 'This is a very comfortable room, ma  said Mr. Bumble looking round.   am, would be a complete thing.', 'It would be too much for one,', 'But not for two, ma  rejoined Mr. Bumble, in soft accents. ', 'The board allows you coals, don', 'And candles,', 'Coals, candles, and house-rent free, Oh, Mrs. Corney, what an Angel you are!', 'Such porochial perfection! You know that Mr. Slout is worse to-night, my fascinator?', 'Yes,', 'He can  pursued Mr. Bumble. ', 'The little word? The one little, little, little word, my blessed Corney?', 'The one little, little, little word, my blessed Corney?', 'Ye--ye--yes!', 'One more, compose your darling feelings for only one more.  When is it to come off?', 'Very good, I s as I go home, and tell him to send to-morrow morning.  Was it that as frightened you, love?', 'It wasn', 'It must have been something, love, Won', 'Not now, one of these days.  After we', 'After we  exclaimed Mr. Bumble.   t any impudence from any of them male paupers as--', 'No, no, love!', 'If I thought it was, if I thought as any one of ', 'They wouldn', 'They had better not! Let me see any man, porochial or extra-porochial, as would presume to do it; and I can tell him that he wouldn', 'Here  said Charlotte; ', 'What a delicious thing is a oyster! What a pity it is, a number of  t it, Charlotte?', 'It', 'So it is, An', 'Not overmuch, I like to see you eat  em myself.', 'Lor! how queer!', 'Have another, Here', 'I can  said Noah.   m very sorry.  Come here, Charlotte, and I', 'What! Say that again, sir.', 'Say it again, you wile, owdacious fellow! How dare you mention such a thing, sir?  And how dare you encourage him, you insolent minx?  Kiss her! Faugh!', 'Faugh!', 'I didn  said Noah, blubbering.   s always a-kissing of me, whether I like it, or not.', 'Oh, Noah,', 'Yer are; yer know yer are! She  of it, Mr. Bumble, sir; she chucks me under the chin, please, sir; and makes all manner of love!', 'Silence! Take yourself downstairs, ma s shell after breakfast to-morrow morning.  Do you hear sir?  Kissing! The sin and wickedness of the lower orders in this porochial district is frightful!  If Parliament don s ruined, and the character of the peasantry gone for ever!', 'Wolves tear your throats! I wish I was among some of you; you', 'Stop, you white-livered hound! Stop!', 'Stop!', 'Bear a hand with the boy, Come back!', 'Quicker! Don', 'It  cried Toby;  em your heels.', 'Ho, ho, there! Pincher! Neptune!  Come here, come here!', 'My advice, or, leastways, I should say, my _orders_, is, that we ', 'I am agreeable to anything which is agreeable to Mr. Giles,', 'I shouldn  said the third, who had called the dogs back, ', 'Certainly, and whatever Mr. Giles says, it isn', 'You are afraid, Brittles,', 'I an', 'You are,', 'You', 'You', 'I  said he,  re all afraid.', 'Speak for yourself, sir,', 'So I do, It', 'So am I, only there', 'But it  said Mr. Giles, when he had explained,  d caught one of them rascals.', 'I know what it was, it was the gate.', 'I shouldn', 'You may depend upon it, that that gate stopped the flow of the excitement.  I felt all mine suddenly going away, as I was climbing over it.', 'It was about half-past two, or I wouldn t have been a little nearer three, when I woke up, and, turning round in my bed, as it might be so, (here Mr. Giles turned round in his chair, and pulled the corner of the table-cloth over him to imitate bed-clothes,) I fancied I heerd a noise.', '--Heerd a noise, I says, at first, "This is illusion"; and was composing myself off to sleep, when I heerd the noise again, distinct.', 'What sort of a noise?', 'A kind of a busting noise,', 'More like the noise of powdering a iron bar on a nutmeg-grater,', 'It was, when _you_ heerd it, sir, but, at this time, it had a busting sound.  I turned down the clothes sat up in bed; and listened.', 'I heerd it now, quite apparent, "Somebody," I says, "is forcing of a door, or window; what ll call up that poor lad, Brittles, and save him from being murdered in his bed; or his throat," I says, "may be cut from his right ear to his left, without his ever knowing it."', 'I tossed off the clothes, got softly out of bed; drew on a pair of--', 'Ladies present, Mr. Giles,', '--Of _shoes_, sir, seized the loaded pistol that always goes upstairs with the plate-basket; and walked on tiptoes to his room. "Brittles," I says, when I had woke him, "don', 't be frightened!"', 'So you did,', '"We  continued Giles;  t be frightened."', '_Was_ he frightened?', 'Not a bit of it, He was as firm--ah! pretty near as firm as I was.', 'I should have died at once, I', 'You', 'Brittles is right, from a woman, nothing else was to be expected. We, being men, took a dark lantern that was standing on Brittle', 'from a woman, nothing else was to be expected. We, being men, took a dark lantern that was standing on Brittle', 'It was a knock, Open the door, somebody.', 'It seems a strange sort of a thing, a knock coming at such a time in the morning, but the door must be opened.  Do you hear, somebody?', 'If Brittles would rather open the door, in the presence of witnesses, I am ready to make one.', 'So am I,', 'A boy! What t you know?', 'Here he is! here am! Here', '--In a lantern, miss,', 'Giles!', 'I  replied Mr. Giles.   t be frightened, miss; I ain t make a very desperate resistance, miss! I was soon too many for him.', 'Hush! you frighten my aunt as much as the thieves did.  Is the poor creature much hurt?', 'Wounded desperate, miss,', 'He looks as if he was a-going, miss, Wouldn', 'Hush, pray; there  rejoined the lady.  ', 'But won  asked Mr. Giles, with as much pride as if Oliver were some bird of rare plumage, that he had skilfully brought down.  ', 'Not now, for the world, Poor fellow! Oh! treat him kindly, Giles for my sake!', 'And Brittles has been gone upwards of an hour, has he?', 'An hour and twelve minutes, ma', 'He is always slow,', 'Brittles always was a slow boy, ma', 'He gets worse instead of better, I think,', 'It is very inexcusable in him if he stops to play with any other boys,', 'I never heard of such a thing! My dear Mrs. Maylie--bless my soul--in the silence of the night, too--I _never_ heard of such a thing!', 'You ought to be dead; positively dead with the fright, Why didn m sure, under such circumstances.  Dear, dear!  So unexpected!  In the silence of the night, too!', 'And you, Miss Rose, I--', 'Oh! very much so, indeed, but there is a poor creature upstairs, whom aunt wishes you to see.', 'Ah! to be sure, so there is.  That was your handiwork, Giles, I understand.', 'Honour, eh? well, I don s as honourable to hit a thief in a back kitchen, as to hit your man at twelve paces.  Fancy that he fired in the air, and you', 'Gad, that  said the doctor.   ll look in again, as I come down, Mrs. Maylie.  That t have believed it!', 'This is a very extraordinary thing, Mrs. Maylie,', 'He is not in danger, I hope?', 'Why, that would _not_ be an extraordinary thing, under the circumstances, though I don', 'No,', 'Nor heard anything about him?', 'No.', 'I beg your pardon, ma but I was going to tell you about him when Doctor Losberne came in.', 'Rose wished to see the man, but I wouldn', 'Humph! There is nothing very alarming in his appearance.  Have you any objection to see him in my presence?', 'If it be necessary, certainly not.', 'Then I think it is necessary, at all events, I am quite sure that you would deeply regret not having done so, if you postponed it.  He is perfectly quiet and comfortable now. Allow me--Miss Rose, will you permit me?  Not the slightest fear, I pledge you my honour!', 'Now, let us hear what you think of him.  He has not been shaved very recently, but he don', 'What can this mean? This poor child can never have been the pupil of robbers!', 'Vice, takes up her abode in many temples; and who can say that a fair outside shell not enshrine her?', 'But at so early an age!', 'My dear young lady, crime, like death, is not confined to the old and withered alone.  The youngest and fairest are too often its chosen victims.', 'But, can you--oh! can you really believe that this delicate boy has been the voluntary associate of the worst outcasts of society?', 'But even if he has been wicked, think how young he is; think that he may never have known a mother s sake, think of this, before you let them drag this sick child to a prison, which in any case must be the grave of all his chances of amendment.  Oh! as you love me, and know that I have never felt the want of parents in your goodness and affection, but that I might have done so, and might have been equally helpless and unprotected with this poor child, have pity upon him before it is too late!', 'My dear love, do you think I would harm a hair of his head?', 'Oh, no!', 'No, surely, my days are drawing to their close: and may mercy be shown to me as I show it to others! What can I do to save him, sir?', 'Let me think, ma  said the doctor; ', 'I think if you give me a full and unlimited commission to bully Giles, and that little boy, Brittles, I can manage it.  Giles is a faithful fellow and an old servant, I know; but you can make it up to him in a thousand ways, and reward him for being such a good shot besides.  You don', 'Unless there is some other way of preserving the child,', 'There is no other, No other, take my word for it.', 'Then my aunt invests you with full power, but pray don', 'You seem to think, that everybody is disposed to be hard-hearted to-day, except yourself, Miss Rose. I only hope, for the sake of the rising male sex generally, that you may be found in as vulnerable and soft-hearted a mood by the first eligible young fellow who appeals to your compassion; and I wish I were a young fellow, that I might avail myself, on the spot, of such a favourable opportunity for doing so, as the present.', 'You are as great a boy as poor Brittles himself,', 'Well, that is no very difficult matter.  But to return to this boy.  The great point of our agreement is yet to come.  He will wake in an hour or so, I dare say; and although I have told that thick-headed constable-fellow downstairs that he musn', 'Oh no, aunt!', 'Oh yes, aunt! Is is a bargain?', 'He cannot be hardened in vice, It is impossible.', 'Very good, then so much the more reason for acceding to my proposition.', 'Sit still!', 'Thank you, sir, said Mr. Giles.   em here.', 'How is the patient to-night, sir?', 'So-so I am afraid you have got yourself into a scrape there, Mr. Giles.', 'I hope you don  said Mr. Giles, trembling,  s going to die.  If I thought it, I should never be happy again.  I wouldn', 'That  said the doctor, mysteriously.  ', 'Yes, sir, I hope so,', 'And what are _you_, boy?', 'Lord bless me, sir! I', 'Then tell me this, both of you, both of you! Are you going to take upon yourselves to swear, that that boy upstairs is the boy that was put through the little window last night?  Out with it!  Come!  We are prepared for you!', 'Pay attention to the reply, constable, will you? s utmost acuteness. ', 'It', 'That', 'Here  said the doctor,  s glimpse of a boy, in the midst of gunpowder smoke, and in all the distraction of alarm and darkness.  Here', 'I ask you again, are you, on your solemn oaths, able to identify that boy?', 'It', 'The what?', 'The Bow Street officers, sir, me and Mr. Giles sent for ', 'me and Mr. Giles sent for ', 'What?', 'Yes, I sent a message up by the coachman, and I only wonder they weren', 'You did, did you?  Then confound your--slow coaches down here; that', 'Who', 'Open the door, it', 'Just send somebody out to relieve my mate, will you, young man? he us here, that you could put it up in, for five or ten minutes?', 'Tell your governor that Blathers and Duff is here, will you? Oh!  Good-evening, master.  Can I have a word or two with you in private, if you please?', 'This is the lady of the house,', 'Now, with regard to this here robbery, master, What are the circumstances?', 'I can  said Blathers;  t mind committing myself to that extent,--that this wasn', 'Certainly not,', 'And, translating the word yokel for the benefit of the ladies, I apprehend your meaning to be, that this attempt was not made by a countryman?', 'That  replied Blathers.  ', 'All,', 'Now, what is this, about this here boy that the servants are a-talking on?', 'Nothing at all, One of the frightened servants chose to take it into his head, that he had something to do with this attempt to break into the house; but it', 'Wery easy disposed of, if it is,', 'What he says is quite correct, Who is the boy? What account does he give of himself?  Where did he come from? He didn', 'Of course not, I know his whole history: but we can talk about that presently.  You would like, first, to see the place where the thieves made their attempt, I suppose?', 'Certainly, We had better inspect the premises first, and examine the servants afterwards. That', 'Upon my word, I hardly know what to do.', 'Surely, the poor child', 'I doubt it, my dear young lady, I don', 'I don', 'You believe it, surely?', '_I_ believe it, strange as it is; and perhaps I may be an old fool for doing so, but I don', 'Why not?', 'Because, my pretty cross-examiner, because, viewed with their eyes, there are many ugly points about it; he can only prove the parts that look ill, and none of those that look well. Confound the fellows, they _will_ have the why and the wherefore, and will take nothing for granted.  On his own showing, you see, he has been the companion of thieves for some time past; he has been carried to a police-officer, on a charge of picking a gentleman s house, to a place which he cannot describe or point out, and of the situation of which he has not the remotest idea.  He is brought down to Chertsey, by men who seem to have taken a violent fancy to him, whether he will or no; and is put through a window to rob a house; and then, just at the very moment when he is going to alarm the inmates, and so do the very thing that would set him all to rights, there rushes into the way, a blundering dog of a half-bred butler, and shoots him! As if on purpose to prevent his doing any good for himself! Don', 'I see it, of course, s impetuosity; ', 'No, of course not!  Bless the bright eyes of your sex!  They never see, whether for good or bad, more than one side of any question; and that is, always, the one which first presents itself to them.', 'The more I think of it, the more I see that it will occasion endless trouble and difficulty if we put these men in possession of the boy', 'Oh! what is to be done? Dear, dear! why did they send for these people?', 'Why, indeed! I would not have had them here, for the world.', 'All I know is, that we must try and carry it off with a bold face.  The object is a good one, and that must be our excuse.  The boy has strong symptoms of fever upon him, and is in no condition to be talked to any more; that', 'Well, master, This warn', 'And what the devil', 'We call it a put-up robbery, ladies, s, ', 'when the servants is in it.', 'Nobody suspected them, in this case,', 'Wery likely not, ma  replied Blathers; ', 'More likely on that wery account,', 'We find it was a town hand, for the style of work is first-rate.', 'for the style of work is first-rate.', 'Wery pretty indeed it is,', 'There was two of   continued Blathers;  em; that s all to be said at present.  We ve got upstairs at once, if you please.', 'Perhaps they will take something to drink first, Mrs. Maylie?', 'Oh! to be sure! You shall have it immediately, if you will.', 'Why, thank you, miss! it s handy, miss; don', 'What shall it be?', 'A little drop of spirits, master, if it  replied Blathers.   s a cold ride from London, ma', 'Ah! I have seen a good many pieces of business like this, in my time, ladies.', 'That crack down in the back lane at Edmonton, Blathers,', 'That was something in this way, warn  rejoined Mr. Blathers; ', 'that was done by Conkey Chickweed, that was.', 'You always gave that to him It was the Family Pet, I tell you.  Conkey hadn', 'Get out! I know better.  Do you mind that time when Conkey was robbed of his money, though?  What a start that was!  Better than any novel-book _I_ ever see!', 'What was that?', 'It was a robbery, miss, that hardly anybody would have been down upon, This here Conkey Chickweed--', 'Conkey means Nosey, ma', 'Of course the lady knows that, don  demanded Mr. Blathers.  ve seen  en.  He warn em, found that Conkey had hit the robber; for there was traces of blood, all the way to some palings a good distance off; and there they lost  t know what all, was got up for the poor man, who was in a wery low state of mind about his loss, and went up and down the streets, for three or four days, a pulling his hair off in such a desperate manner that many people was afraid he might be going to make away with himself. One day he came up to the office, all in a hurry, and had a private interview with the magistrate, who, after a deal of talk, rings the bell, and orders Jem Spyers in (Jem was a active officer), and tells him to go and assist Mr. Chickweed in apprehending the man as robbed his house. "I see him, Spyers," said Chickweed, "pass my house yesterday morning," "Why didn re sure to have him; for between ten and eleven o s notice. He was smoking his pipe here, late at night, when all of a sudden Chickweed roars out, "Here he is! Stop thief!  Murder!"  Jem Spyers dashes out; and there he sees Chickweed, a-tearing down the street full cry.  Away goes Spyers; on goes Chickweed; round turns the people; everybody roars out, "Thieves!" and Chickweed himself keeps on shouting, all the time, like mad.  Spyers loses sight of him a minute as he turns a corner; shoots round; sees a little crowd; dives in; "Which is the man?" "D--me!" says Chickweed, "I t to be seen nowhere, so they went back to the public-house. Next morning, Spyers took his old place, and looked out, from behind the curtain, for a tall man with a black patch over his eye, till his own two eyes ached again.  At last, he couldn em, to ease  s one, the man', 'Always interrupting, you are, partner!  This here Conkey Chickweed, miss, kept a public-house over Battlebridge way, and he had a cellar, where a good many young lords went to see cock-fighting, and badger-drawing, and that; and a wery intellectual manner the sports was conducted in, for I em off t one of the family, at that time; and one night he was robbed of three hundred and twenty-seven guineas in a canvas bag, that was stole out of his bedroom in the dead of night, by a tall man with a black patch over his eye, who had concealed himself under the bed, and after committing the robbery, jumped slap out of window:  which was only a story high. He was wery quick about it.  But Conkey was quick, too; for he fired a blunderbuss arter him, and roused the neighbourhood. They set up a hue-and-cry, directly, and when they came to look about  em.  However, he had made off with the blunt; and, consequently, the name of Mr. Chickweed, licensed witler, appeared in the Gazette among the other bankrupts; and all manner of benefits and subscriptions, and I don t you up, and collar him!" says Spyers.  "I was so struck all of a heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick," says the poor man; "but we clock at night he passed again."  Spyers no sooner heard this, than he put some clean linen and a comb, in his pocket, in case he should have to stop a day or two; and away he goes, and sets himself down at one of the public-house windows behind the little red curtain, with his hat on, all ready to bolt out, at a moment ve lost him again!"  It was a remarkable occurrence, but he warn t help shutting  em a minute; and the very moment he did so, he hears Chickweed a-roaring out, "Here he is!"  Off he starts once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and after twice as long a run as the yesterday s lost again!  This was done, once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out that Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks with him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had gone mad with grief.', 't you up, and collar him!" says Spyers.  "I was so struck all of a heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick," says the poor man; "but we clock at night he passed again."  Spyers no sooner heard this, than he put some clean linen and a comb, in his pocket, in case he should have to stop a day or two; and away he goes, and sets himself down at one of the public-house windows behind the little red curtain, with his hat on, all ready to bolt out, at a moment ve lost him again!"  It was a remarkable occurrence, but he warn t help shutting  em a minute; and the very moment he did so, he hears Chickweed a-roaring out, "Here he is!"  Off he starts once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and after twice as long a run as the yesterday s lost again!  This was done, once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out that Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks with him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had gone mad with grief.', 't you up, and collar him!" says Spyers.  "I was so struck all of a heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick," says the poor man; "but we clock at night he passed again."  Spyers no sooner heard this, than he put some clean linen and a comb, in his pocket, in case he should have to stop a day or two; and away he goes, and sets himself down at one of the public-house windows behind the little red curtain, with his hat on, all ready to bolt out, at a moment ve lost him again!"  It was a remarkable occurrence, but he warn t help shutting  em a minute; and the very moment he did so, he hears Chickweed a-roaring out, "Here he is!"  Off he starts once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and after twice as long a run as the yesterday s lost again!  This was done, once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out that Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks with him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had gone mad with grief.', 've lost him again!"  It was a remarkable occurrence, but he warn t help shutting  em a minute; and the very moment he did so, he hears Chickweed a-roaring out, "Here he is!"  Off he starts once more, with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and after twice as long a run as the yesterday s lost again!  This was done, once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out that Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks with him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had gone mad with grief.', 'What did Jem Spyers say?', 'Jem Spyers, for a long time said nothing at all, and listened to everything without seeming to, which showed he understood his business.  But, one morning, he walked into the bar, and taking out his snuffbox, says "Chickweed, I t been so precious anxious to keep up appearances!', 'Very curious, indeed, Now, if you please, you can walk upstairs.', 'If _you_ please, sir,', 'This, this is the lad, who, being accidently wounded by a spring-gun in some boyish trespass on Mr. What-d s grounds, at the back here, comes to the house for assistance this morning, and is immediately laid hold of and maltreated, by that ingenious gentleman with the candle in his hand:  who has placed his life in considerable danger, as I can professionally certify.', 'You don', 'It was all done for the--for the best, sir, I am sure I thought it was the boy, or I wouldn', 'Thought it was what boy?', 'The housebreaker  replied Giles.  ', 'Well?  Do you think so now?', 'Think what, now?', 'Think it', 'I don t know, I couldn', 'What do you think?', 'I don  replied poor Giles.   t think it is the boy; indeed, I t.  You know it can', 'Has this man been a-drinking, sir?', 'What a precious muddle-headed chap you are!', 'Poor fellow! you shall have many opportunities of serving us, if you will. We are going into the country, and my aunt intends that you shall accompany us.  The quiet place, the pure air, and all the pleasure and beauties of spring, will restore you in a few days.  We will employ you in a hundred ways, when you can bear the trouble.', 'The trouble! Oh! dear lady, if I could but work for you; if I could only give you pleasure by watering your flowers, or watching your birds, or running up and down the whole day long, to make you happy; what would I give to do it!', 'You shall give nothing at all, for, as I told you before, we shall employ you in a hundred ways; and if you only take half the trouble to please us, that you promise now, you will make me very happy indeed.', 'Happy, ma  cried Oliver; ', 'You will make me happier than I can tell you, To think that my dear good aunt should have been the means of rescuing any one from such sad misery as you have described to us, would be an unspeakable pleasure to me; but to know that the object of her goodness and compassion was sincerely grateful and attached, in consequence, would delight me, more than you can well imagine.  Do you understand me?', 'To think that my dear good aunt should have been the means of rescuing any one from such sad misery as you have described to us, would be an unspeakable pleasure to me; but to know that the object of her goodness and compassion was sincerely grateful and attached, in consequence, would delight me, more than you can well imagine.  Do you understand me?', 'Oh yes, ma  replied Oliver eagerly; ', 'To whom?', 'To the kind gentleman, and the dear old nurse, who took so much care of me before, If they knew how happy I am, they would be pleased, I am sure.', 'I am sure they would, s benefactress; ', 'Has he, ma  cried Oliver, his face brightening with pleasure.   t know what I shall do for joy when I see their kind faces once again!', 'What  cried the doctor, as usual, all in a bustle.  ', 'That, sir, That house!', 'Yes; well, what of it?  Stop coachman.  Pull up here, What of the house, my man; eh?', 'The thieves--the house they took me to!', 'The devil it is! Hallo, there! let me out!', 'Halloa? What', 'Matter! s reflection.  ', 'There  replied the hump-backed man, coolly,  t take your hands off.  Do you hear me?', 'I hear you,', 'Where s his rascally name--Sikes; that s Sikes, you thief?', 'Now! what do you mean by coming into my house, in this violent way? Do you want to rob me, or to murder me?  Which is it?', 'Did you ever know a man come out to do either, in a chariot and pair, you ridiculous old vampire?', 'What do you want, then? Will you take yourself off, before I do you a mischief?  Curse you!', 'As soon as I think proper, s account of it.  ', 'Will you? If you ever want me, I t lived here mad and all alone, for five-and-twenty years, to be scared by you.  You shall pay for this; you shall pay for this.', 'Stupid enough, this, the boy must have made a mistake.  Here!  Put that in your pocket, and shut yourself up again.', 'I am an ass! Did you know that before, Oliver?', 'No, sir.', 'Then don', 'An ass, Even if it had been the right place, and the right fellows had been there, what could I have done, single-handed? And if I had had assistance, I see no good that I should have done, except leading to my own exposure, and an unavoidable statement of the manner in which I have hushed up this business. That would have served me right, though. I am always involving myself in some scrape or other, by acting on impulse.  It might have done me good.', 'Now, my boy, which house is it?', 'That!  That! The white house.  Oh! make haste!  Pray make haste! I feel as if I should die: it makes me tremble so.', 'The white house.  Oh! make haste!  Pray make haste! I feel as if I should die: it makes me tremble so.', 'Come, come! You will see them directly, and they will be overjoyed to find you safe and well.', 'Oh!  I hope so! They were so good to me; so very, very good to me.', 'To Let.', 'Knock at the next door, s arm in his.  ', 'Has his housekeeper gone too?', 'Yes, sir The old gentleman, the housekeeper, and a gentleman who was a friend of Mr. Brownlow', 'Then turn towards home again, and don', 'The book-stall keeper, sir? I know the way there.  See him, pray, sir!  Do see him!', 'My poor boy, this is disappointment enough for one day, Quite enough for both of us.  If we go to the book-stall keeper   And in obedience to the doctor', 'Rose, my dear!', 'Rose, my love! What is this?  In tears!  My dear child, what distresses you?', 'Nothing, aunt; nothing, I don t describe it; but I feel--', 'Not ill, my love?', 'No, no!  Oh, not ill! I shall be better presently.  Close the window, pray!', 'My child! I never saw you so before.', 'I would not alarm you if I could avoid it, but indeed I have tried very hard, and cannot help this. I fear I _am_ ill, aunt.', 'I hope, that nothing is the matter?  She don', 'I hope not, Oliver.  I have been very happy with her for some years: too happy, perhaps.  It may be time that I should meet with some misfortune; but I hope it is not this.', 'What?', 'The heavy blow, of losing the dear girl who has so long been my comfort and happiness.', 'Oh!  God forbid!', 'Amen to that, my child!', 'Surely there is no danger of anything so dreadful? Two hours ago, she was quite well.', 'She is very ill now, and will be worse, I am sure.  My dear, dear Rose!  Oh, what shall I do without her!', 'And consider, ma  said Oliver, as the tears forced themselves into his eyes, despite of his efforts to the contrary. ', 'Hush! s head.  s will be done!  I love her; and He knows how well!', 'We must be active, Oliver, and not give way to useless grief, this letter must be sent, with all possible expedition, to Mr. Losberne.  It must be carried to the market-town: which is not more than four miles off, by the footpath across the field:  and thence dispatched, by an express on horseback, straight to Chertsey. The people at the inn will undertake to do this: and I can trust to you to see it done, I know.', 'Here is another letter, but whether to send it now, or wait until I see how Rose goes on, I scarcely know.  I would not forward it, unless I feared the worst.', 'Is it for Chertsey, too, ma', 'No,', 'Shall it go, ma', 'I think not, I will wait until to-morrow.', 'Hah! What the devil', 'I beg your pardon, sir, I was in a great hurry to get home, and didn', 'Death! Who would have thought it! Grind him to ashes! He', 'I am sorry, s wild look.  ', 'Rot you! if I had only had the courage to say the word, I might have been free of you in a night.  Curses on your head, and black death on your heart, you imp!  What are you doing here?', 'What of Rose? Tell me at once!  I can bear it; anything but suspense!  Oh, tell me! in the name of Heaven!', 'You must compose yourself, Be calm, my dear ma', 'Let me go, in God', 'No! As He is good and merciful, she will live to bless us all, for years to come.', 'Here! Oliver, what', 'Is is you, Giles?', 'In a word! Better or worse?', 'Better--much better!', 'Thank Heaven! You are sure?', 'Quite, sir, The change took place only a few hours ago; and Mr. Losberne says, that all danger is at an end.', 'You are quite certain?  There is no possibility of any mistake on your part, my boy, is there? Do not deceive me, by awakening hopes that are not to be fulfilled.', 'Do not deceive me, by awakening hopes that are not to be fulfilled.', 'I would not for the world, sir, Indeed you may believe me.  Mr. Losberne', 'I think you had better go on to my mother  said he.  ', 'I beg your pardon, Mr. Harry, but if you would leave the postboy to say that, I should be very much obliged to you.  It wouldn', 'Well, you can do as you like. Let him go on with the luggage, if you wish it, and do you follow with us. Only first exchange that nightcap for some more appropriate covering, or we shall be taken for madmen.', 'Mother! why did you not write before?', 'I did, but, on reflection, I determined to keep back the letter until I had heard Mr. Losberne', 'But why, why run the chance of that occurring which so nearly happened?  If Rose had--I cannot utter that word now--if this illness had terminated differently, how could you ever have forgiven yourself!  How could I ever have know happiness again!', 'If that _had_ been the case, Harry, I fear your happiness would have been effectually blighted, and that your arrival here, a day sooner or a day later, would have been of very, very little import.', 'And who can wonder if it be so, mother? or why should I say, _if_?--It is--it is--you know it, mother--you must know it!', 'I know that she deserves the best and purest love the heart of man can offer, I know that the devotion and affection of her nature require no ordinary return, but one that shall be deep and lasting.  If I did not feel this, and know, besides, that a changed behaviour in one she loved would break her heart, I should not feel my task so difficult of performance, or have to encounter so many struggles in my own bosom, when I take what seems to me to be the strict line of duty.', 'This is unkind, mother, Do you still suppose that I am a boy ignorant of my own mind, and mistaking the impulses of my own soul?', 'I think, my dear son, that youth has many generous impulses which do not last; and that among them are some, which, being gratified, become only the more fleeting.  Above all, I think s face, ', 'Mother, he would be a selfish brute, unworthy alike of the name of man and of the woman you describe, who acted thus.', 'You think so now, Harry,', 'And ever will! The mental agony I have suffered, during the last two days, wrings from me the avowal to you of a passion which, as you well know, is not one of yesterday, nor one I have lightly formed.  On Rose, sweet, gentle girl! my heart is set, as firmly as ever heart of man was set on woman.  I have no thought, no view, no hope in life, beyond her; and if you oppose me in this great stake, you take my peace and happiness in your hands, and cast them to the wind.  Mother, think better of this, and of me, and do not disregard the happiness of which you seem to think so little.', 'Harry, it is because I think so much of warm and sensitive hearts, that I would spare them from being wounded. But we have said enough, and more than enough, on this matter, just now.', 'Let it rest with Rose, then, You will not press these overstrained opinions of yours, so far, as to throw any obstacle in my way?', 'I will not, but I would have you consider--', 'I _have_ considered! Mother, I have considered, years and years.  I have considered, ever since I have been capable of serious reflection.  My feelings remain unchanged, as they ever will; and why should I suffer the pain of a delay in giving them vent, which can be productive of no earthly good?  No!  Before I leave this place, Rose shall hear me.', 'She shall,', 'There is something in your manner, which would almost imply that she will hear me coldly, mother,', 'Not coldly, far from it.', 'How then? She has formed no other attachment?', 'No, indeed, you have, or I mistake, too strong a hold on her affections already.  What I would say, is this.  Before you stake your all on this chance; before you suffer yourself to be carried to the highest point of hope; reflect for a few moments, my dear child, on Rose', 'What do you mean?', 'That I leave you to discover, I must go back to her.  God bless you!', 'I shall see you again to-night?', 'By and by, when I leave Rose.', 'You will tell her I am here?', 'Of course,', 'And say how anxious I have been, and how much I have suffered, and how I long to see her.  You will not refuse to do this, mother?', 'No, I will tell her all.', 'Have you shot anything particular, lately, Giles?', 'Nothing particular, sir,', 'Nor catching any thieves, nor identifying any house-breakers?', 'None at all, sir,', 'Well, I am sorry to hear it, because you do that sort of thing admirably.  Pray, how is Brittles?', 'The boy is very well, sir, and sends his respectful duty, sir.', 'That  said the doctor.  ', 'Hush, my dear! it is he, sure enough.  Come away.', 'He! could I mistake him, think you? If a crowd of ghosts were to put themselves into his exact shape, and he stood amongst them, there is something that would tell me how to point him out.  If you buried him fifty feet deep, and took me across his grave, I fancy I should know, if there wasn', 'What direction did he take?', 'That, I missed them in an instant.', 'Then, they are in the ditch! Follow!  And keep as near me, as you can.', 'It must have been a dream, Oliver,', 'Oh no, indeed, sir, s countenance; ', 'Who was the other?', 'The very same man I told you of, who came so suddenly upon me at the inn, We had our eyes fixed full upon each other; and I could swear to him.', 'They took this way? are you sure?', 'As I am that the men were at the window, The tall man leaped over, just there; and the Jew, running a few paces to the right, crept through that gap.', 'This is strange!', 'Strange? Blathers and Duff, themselves, could make nothing of it.', 'A few--a very few--will suffice, Rose, What I shall have to say, has already presented itself to your mind; the most cherished hopes of my heart are not unknown to you, though from my lips you have not heard them stated.', 'I--I--ought to have left here, before,', 'You should, indeed, Forgive me for saying so, but I wish you had.', 'I was brought here, by the most dreadful and agonising of all apprehensions, the fear of losing the one dear being on whom my every wish and hope are fixed.  You had been dying; trembling between earth and heaven.  We know that when the young, the beautiful, and good, are visited with sickness, their pure spirits insensibly turn towards their bright home of lasting rest; we know, Heaven help us! that the best and fairest of our kind, too often fade in blooming.', 'A creature, a creature as fair and innocent of guile as one of God', 'I did not mean that, I only wish you had left here, that you might have turned to high and noble pursuits again; to pursuits well worthy of you.', 'There is no pursuit more worthy of me:  more worthy of the highest nature that exists:  than the struggle to win such a heart as yours, Rose, my own dear Rose!  For years--for years--I have loved you; hoping to win my way to fame, and then come proudly home and tell you it had been pursued only for you to share; thinking, in my daydreams, how I would remind you, in that happy moment, of the many silent tokens I had given of a boy', 'Your behaviour has ever been kind and noble. As you believe that I am not insensible or ungrateful, so hear my answer.', 'It is, that I may endeavour to deserve you; it is, dear Rose?', 'It is, that you must endeavour to forget me; not as your old and dearly-attached companion, for that would wound me deeply; but, as the object of your love.  Look into the world; think how many hearts you would be proud to gain, are there. Confide some other passion to me, if you will; I will be the truest, warmest, and most faithful friend you have.', 'And your reasons, Rose, your reasons for this decision?', 'You have a right to know them, You can say nothing to alter my resolution.  It is a duty that I must perform.  I owe it, alike to others, and to myself.', 'To yourself?', 'Yes, Harry.  I owe it to myself, that I, a friendless, portionless, girl, with a blight upon my name, should not give your friends reason to suspect that I had sordidly yielded to your first passion, and fastened myself, a clog, on all your hopes and projects.  I owe it to you and yours, to prevent you from opposing, in the warmth of your generous nature, this great obstacle to your progress in the world.', 'If your inclinations chime with your sense of duty--', 'They do not,', 'Then you return my love? Say but that, dear Rose; say but that; and soften the bitterness of this hard disappointment!', 'If I could have done so, without doing heavy wrong to him I loved, I could have--', 'Have received this declaration very differently? Do not conceal that from me, at least, Rose.', 'I could, Stay! why should we prolong this painful interview?  Most painful to me, and yet productive of lasting happiness, notwithstanding; for it _will_ be happiness to know that I once held the high place in your regard which I now occupy, and every triumph you achieve in life will animate me with new fortitude and firmness.  Farewell, Harry!  As we have met to-day, we meet no more; but in other relations than those in which this conversation have placed us, we may be long and happily entwined; and may every blessing that the prayers of a true and earnest heart can call down from the source of all truth and sincerity, cheer and prosper you!', 'Another word, Rose, Your reason in your own words. From your own lips, let me hear it!', 'The prospect before you, is a brilliant one. All the honours to which great talents and powerful connections can help men in public life, are in store for you. But those connections are proud; and I will neither mingle with such as may hold in scorn the mother who gave me life; nor bring disgrace or failure on the son of her who has so well supplied that mother  said the young lady, turning away, as her temporary firmness forsook her, ', 'One word more, Rose.  Dearest Rose! one more! If I had been less--less fortunate, the world would call it--if some obscure and peaceful life had been my destiny--if I had been poor, sick, helpless--would you have turned from me then?  Or has my probable advancement to riches and honour, given this scruple birth?', 'Do not press me to reply, The question does not arise, and never will.  It is unfair, almost unkind, to urge it.', 'If your answer be what I almost dare to hope it is, it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way, and light the path before me.  It is not an idle thing to do so much, by the utterance of a few brief words, for one who loves you beyond all else. Oh, Rose: in the name of my ardent and enduring attachment; in the name of all I have suffered for you, and all you doom me to undergo; answer me this one question!', 'it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way, and light the path before me.  It is not an idle thing to do so much, by the utterance of a few brief words, for one who loves you beyond all else. Oh, Rose: in the name of my ardent and enduring attachment; in the name of all I have suffered for you, and all you doom me to undergo; answer me this one question!', 'Then, if your lot had been differently cast, if you had been even a little, but not so far, above me; if I could have been a help and comfort to you in any humble scene of peace and retirement, and not a blot and drawback in ambitious and distinguished crowds; I should have been spared this trial.  I have every reason to be happy, very happy, now; but then, Harry, I own I should have been happier.', 'I cannot help this weakness, and it makes my purpose stronger, I must leave you now, indeed.', 'I ask one promise, Once, and only once more,--say within a year, but it may be much sooner,--I may speak to you again on this subject, for the last time.', 'Not to press me to alter my right determination, it will be useless.', 'No, to hear you repeat it, if you will--finally repeat it!  I will lay at your feet, whatever of station of fortune I may possess; and if you still adhere to your present resolution, will not seek, by word or act, to change it.', 'Then let it be so, it is but one pang the more, and by that time I may be enabled to bear it better.', 'And so you are resolved to be my travelling companion this morning; eh? Why, you are not in the same mind or intention two half-hours together!', 'You will tell me a different tale one of these days,', 'I hope I may have good cause to do so, though I confess I don t it, Oliver?', 'I should have been very sorry not to have been at home when you and Mr. Maylie went away, sir,', 'That  said the doctor; ', 'The great nobs, under which designation, I presume, you include my most stately uncle, have not communicated with me at all, since I have been here; nor, at this time of the year, is it likely that anything would occur to render necessary my immediate attendance among them.', 'Well, you are a queer fellow.  But of course they will get you into parliament at the election before Christmas, and these sudden shiftings and changes are no bad preparation for political life.  There', 'Oliver, let me speak a word with you.', 'You can write well now?', 'I hope so, sir,', 'I shall not be at home again, perhaps for some time; I wish you would write to me--say once a fort-night:  every alternate Monday: to the General Post Office in London.  Will you?', 'Oh! certainly, sir; I shall be proud to do it,', 'I should like to know how--how my mother and Miss Maylie are, and you can fill up a sheet by telling me what walks you take, and what you talk about, and whether she--they, I mean--seem happy and quite well. You understand me?', 'Oh! quite, sir, quite,', 'I would rather you did not mention it to them, because it might make my mother anxious to write to me oftener, and it is a trouble and worry to her. Let it be a secret between you and me; and mind you tell me everything!  I depend upon you.', 'Drive on! hard, fast, full gallop!  Nothing short of flying will keep pace with me, to-day.', 'Halloa! something very short of flying will keep pace with _me_.  Do you hear?', 'He seems in high spirits and happy, I feared for a time he might be otherwise.  I was mistaken.  I am very, very glad.', 'And to-morrow two months it was done! It seems a age.', 'It seems a age.', 'I sold myself, for six teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a milk-pot; with a small quantity of second-hand furniture, and twenty pound in money.  I went very reasonable.  Cheap, dirt cheap!', 'for six teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a milk-pot; with a small quantity of second-hand furniture, and twenty pound in money.  I went very reasonable.  Cheap, dirt cheap!', 'Cheap! s ear: ', 'Mrs. Bumble, ma', 'Well!', 'Have the goodness to look at me,  said Mr. Bumble to himself, ', 'Are you going to sit snoring there, all day?', 'I am going to sit here, as long as I think proper, ma  rejoined Mr. Bumble; ', '_Your_ prerogative!', 'I said the word, ma  said Mr. Bumble.  ', 'And what', 'To obey, ma  thundered Mr. Bumble.  ', 'It opens the lungs, washes the countenance, exercises the eyes, and softens down the temper, So cry away.', 'Get up! And take yourself away from here, unless you want me to do something desperate.', 'Are you going?', 'Certainly, my dear, certainly, I didn m going, my dear!  You are so very violent, that really I--', 'Hem! These women at least shall continue to respect the prerogative. Hallo! hallo there!  What do you mean by this noise, you hussies?', 'My dear, I didn', 'Didn  repeated Mrs. Bumble.  ', 'I thought they were talking rather too much to be doing their work properly, my dear,', '_You_ thought they were talking too much? What business is it of yours?', 'Why, my dear--', 'What business is it of yours?', 'It re matron here, my dear, but I thought you mightn', 'but I thought you mightn', 'I  returned his lady.   t want any of your interference.  You t concern you, making everybody in the house laugh, the moment your back is turned, and making yourself look like a fool every hour in the day.  Be off; come!', 'All in two months! Two months!  No more than two months ago, I was not only my own master, but everybody else', 'Two months!  No more than two months ago, I was not only my own master, but everybody else', 'Were you looking for me, when you peered in at the window?', 'Not that I am aware of, unless you   Here Mr. Bumble stopped short; for he was curious to know the stranger', 'I see you were not, or you have known my name.  You don', 'I meant no harm, young man,', 'And have done none,', 'I have seen you before, I think? You were differently dressed at that time, and I only passed you in the street, but I should know you again.  You were beadle here, once; were you not?', 'I was, porochial beadle.', 'Just so, It was in that character I saw you.  What are you now?', 'Master of the workhouse, Master of the workhouse, young man!', 'You have the same eye to your own interest, that you always had, I doubt not?', 'Don', 'I suppose, a married man, is not more averse to turning an honest penny when he can, than a single one.  Porochial officers are not so well paid that they can afford to refuse any little extra fee, when it comes to them in a civil and proper manner.', 'Fill this glass again, s empty tumbler to the landlord.  ', 'Not too strong,', 'You understand what that means, landlord!', 'Now listen to me, I came down to this place, to-day, to find you out; and, by one of those chances which the devil throws in the way of his friends sometimes, you walked into the very room I was sitting in, while you were uppermost in my mind.  I want some information from you.  I don', 'Carry your memory back--let me see--twelve years, last winter.', 'It  said Mr. Bumble.   ve done it.', 'The scene, the workhouse.', 'Good!', 'And the time, night.', 'Yes.', 'And the place, the crazy hole, wherever it was, in which miserable drabs brought forth the life and health so often denied to themselves--gave birth to puling children for the parish to rear; and hid their shame, rot ', 'The lying-in room, I suppose?', 'Yes, A boy was born there.', 'A many boys,', 'A murrain on the young devils!', 'Why, you mean Oliver!  Young Twist! I remember him, of course.  There wasn', 'It ve heard enough of him, s vices.   s of a woman; the hag that nursed his mother.  Where is she?', 'Where is she? It would be hard to tell.  There s gone to; so I suppose she', 'What do you mean?', 'That she died last winter,', 'How can I find her?', 'Only through me,', 'When?', 'To-morrow,', 'At nine in the evening, at nine in the evening, bring her to me there.  I needn s your interest.', 'What do you want? Following me?', 'Only to ask a question, What name am I to ask for?', 'Monks!', 'The place should be somewhere here,', 'Halloa there!', 'Stand still, a minute, I', 'Is that the man?', 'Then, mind what I told you, and be careful to say as little as you can, or you', 'Come in! Don', 'Don', 'What the devil made you stand lingering there, in the wet?', 'We--we were only cooling ourselves,', 'Cooling yourselves! Not all the rain that ever fell, or ever will fall, will put as much of hell t cool yourself so easily; don', 'This is the woman, is it?', 'Hem!  That is the woman,', 'You think women never can keep secrets, I suppose?', 'I know they will always keep _one_ till it', 'And what may that be?', 'The loss of their own good name, So, by the same rule, if a woman m not afraid of her telling it to anybody; not I!  Do you understand, mistress?', 'No,', 'Of course you don  said Monks.  ', 'Hear it! Hear it!  Rolling and crashing on as if it echoed through a thousand caverns where the devils were hiding from it.  I hate the sound!', 'These fits come over me, now and then, and thunder sometimes brings them on. Don s all over for this once.', 'Now, the sooner we come to our business, the better for all.  The woman know what it is, does she?', 'He is right in saying that you were with this hag the night she died; and that she told you something--', 'About the mother of the boy you named, Yes.', 'The first question is, of what nature was her communication?', 'That  observed the woman with much deliberation. ', 'Who the devil can tell that, without knowing of what kind it is?', 'Nobody better than you, I am persuaded,', 'Humph! there may be money', 'there may be money', 'Perhaps there may,', 'Something that was taken from her, Something that she wore.  Something that--', 'You had better bid, I have heard enough, already, to assure me that you are the man I ought to talk to.', 'What', 'It may be nothing; it may be twenty pounds, Speak out, and let me know which.', 'Add five pounds to the sum you have named; give me five-and-twenty pounds in gold, and I', 'Five-and-twenty pounds!', 'I spoke as plainly as I could, It', 'Not a large sum for a paltry secret, that may be nothing when it  cried Monks impatiently; ', 'Such matters keep well, and, like good wine, often double their value in course of time, As to lying dead, there are those who will lie dead for twelve thousand years to come, or twelve million, for anything you or I know, who will tell strange tales at last!', 'What if I pay it for nothing?', 'You can easily take it away again, I am but a woman; alone here; and unprotected.', 'Not alone, my dear, nor unprotected, neither, _I_ am here, my dear. And besides, Mr. Monks is too much of a gentleman to attempt any violence on porochial persons.  Mr. Monks is aware that I am not a young man, my dear, and also that I am a little run to seed, as I may say; bu he has heerd:  I say I have no doubt Mr. Monks has heerd, my dear:  that I am a very determined officer, with very uncommon strength, if I s all.', 'You are a fool, and had better hold your tongue.', 'He had better have cut it out, before he came, if he can  said Monks, grimly.   s your husband, eh?', 'He my husband!', 'I thought as much, when you came in, So much the better; I have less hesitation in dealing with two people, when I find that there m in earnest. See here!', 'Now, gather them up; and when this cursed peal of thunder, which I feel is coming up to break over the house-top, is gone, let', 'When this woman, that we called old Sally, died, she and I were alone.', 'she and I were alone.', 'Was there no one by? No sick wretch or idiot in some other bed?  No one who could hear, and might, by possibility, understand?', 'Not a soul, we were alone.  _I_ stood alone beside the body when death came over it.', 'Good, Go on.', 'She spoke of a young creature, who had brought a child into the world some years before; not merely in the same room, but in the same bed, in which she then lay dying.', 'Ay? Blood!  How things come about!', 'Blood!  How things come about!', 'The child was the one you named to him last night, the mother this nurse had robbed.', 'In life?', 'In death, She stole from the corpse, when it had hardly turned to one, that which the dead mother had prayed her, with her last breath, to keep for the infant', 'She sold it, did she sell it? Where?  When?  To whom?  How long before?', 'As she told me, with great difficulty, that she had done this, she fell back and died.', 'Without saying more? It ll not be played with.  She said more.  I ll know what it was.', 'She didn  said the woman, to all appearance unmoved (as Mr. Bumble was very far from being) by the strange man but she clutched my gown, violently, with one hand, which was partly closed; and when I saw that she was dead, and so removed the hand by force, I found it clasped a scrap of dirty paper.', 'Which contained--', 'Nothing, it was a pawnbroker', 'For what?', 'In good time I  said the woman.   s interest year by year, and prevent its running out; so that if anything came of it, it could still be redeemed.  Nothing had come of it; and, as I tell you, she died with the scrap of paper, all worn and tattered, in her hand.  The time was out in two days; I thought something might one day come of it too; and so redeemed the pledge.', 'Where is it now?', '_There_,', 'It has the word "Agnes" engraved on the inside,', 'There is a blank left for the surname; and then follows the date; which is within a year before the child was born.  I found out that.', 'And this is all?', 'All,', 'I know nothing of the story, beyond what I can guess at, and I want to know nothing; for it', 'You may ask, but whether I answer or not is another question.', '--Which makes three,', 'Is that what you expected to get from me?', 'It is, The other question?', 'What do you propose to do with it?  Can it be used against me?', 'Never, nor against me either.  See here!  But don', 'Look down, Don', 'If you flung a man', 'Twelve miles down the river, and cut to pieces besides,', 'There! If the sea ever gives up its dead, as books say it will, it will keep its gold and silver to itself, and that trash among it.  We have nothing more to say, and may break up our pleasant party.', 'By all means,', 'You  said Monks, with a threatening look.  ', 'You may depend upon me, young man, On everybody', 'I am glad, for your sake, to hear it, Light your lantern!  And get away from here as fast as you can.', 'Not long gone seven, How do you feel to-night, Bill?', 'As weak as water, Here; lend us a hand, and let me get off this thundering bed anyhow.', 'Whining are you? Come!  Don t do anything better than that, cut off altogether.  D', 'I hear you, What fancy have you got in your head now?', 'Oh! you  growled Sikes, marking the tear which trembled in her eye.  ', 'Why, you don d be hard upon me to-night, Bill,', 'No! Why not?', 'Such a number of nights, s tenderness, which communicated something like sweetness of tone, even to her voice:  ve been patient with you, nursing and caring for you, as if you had been a child: and this the first that I t have served me as you did just now, if you t.', 'Well, then, I wouldn s whining again!', 'It  said the girl, throwing herself into a chair.  t you seem to mind me.  It', 'What  demanded Mr. Sikes in a savage voice.  t come over me with your woman', 'What', 'Lend a hand to the girl, can  replied Sikes impatiently.  t stand chattering and grinning at me!', 'Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellows, Charley, and you slap her hands, Fagin, while Bill undoes the petticuts.', 'Why, what evil wind has blowed you here?', 'No evil wind at all, my dear, for evil winds blow nobody any good; and I ll be glad to see. Dodger, my dear, open the bundle; and give Bill the little trifles that we spent all our money on, this morning.', 'Sitch a rabbit pie, Bill, sitch delicate creeturs, with sitch tender limbs, Bill, that the wery bones melt in your mouth, and there em; half a pound of seven and six-penny green, so precious strong that if you mix it with biling water, it t work at all at, afore they got it up to sitch a pitch of goodness,--oh no!  Two half-quartern brans; pound of best fresh; piece of double Glo', 'Ah! You ll do now.', 'Do! I might have been done for, twenty times over, afore you', 'Only hear him, boys! And us come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things.', 'The things is well enough in their way, but what have you got to say for yourself, why you should leave me here, down in the mouth, health, blunt, and everything else; and take no more notice of me, all this mortal time, than if I was that ', 'I never see such a jolly dog as that, Smelling the grub like a old lady a going to market! He  on the stage that dog would, and rewive the drayma besides.', 'Hold your din, What have you got to say for yourself, you withered old fence, eh?', 'I was away from London, a week and more, my dear, on a plant,', 'And what about the other fortnight? What about the other fortnight that you', 'I couldn t go into a long explanation before company; but I couldn', 'Upon your what? Here! Cut me off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the taste of that out of my mouth, or it', 'Don  urged Fagin, submissively. ', 'No!  I t, You t been for the girl, I might have died.', 'You t been for the girl, I might have died.', 'There now, Bill, If it hadn', 'If it hadn', 'He says true enough there! Let him be; let him be.', 'It  said Mr. Sikes; ', 'I haven', 'Then you  retorted Sikes; ', 'Lots! I haven', 'I don ve got, and I dare say you hardly know yourself, as it would take a pretty long time to count it, but I must have some to-night; and that', 'but I must have some to-night; and that', 'Well, well, I', 'You won  rejoined Mr. Sikes.  s a deal too artful, and would forget to come, or lose his way, or get dodged by traps and so be perwented, or anything for an excuse, if you put him up to it.  Nancy shall go to the ken and fetch it, to make all sure; and I s gone.', 'Has nobody been, Toby?', 'Not a living leg, it m as flat as a juryman; and should have gone to sleep, as fast as Newgate, if I hadn  to amuse this youngster.  Horrid dull, I t!', 'Wot a rum chap you are, Tom!', 'Not a bit of it, Am I, Fagin?', 'A very clever fellow, my dear,', 'And Mr. Crackit is a heavy swell; an', 'No doubt at all of that, my dear.', 'And it is a creditable thing to have his acquaintance; an', 'Very much so, indeed, my dear.  They t give it to them.', 'Ah! that t I, Fagin?', 'To be sure you can, and the sooner you go the better, Tom; so make up your loss at once, and don s time you were on the lay.  Come!  It', 'Now, I ve got none to lock up, my dear--ha! ha! ha!--none to lock up. It m fond of seeing the young people about me; and I bear it all, I bear it all.  Hush! who', 'Bah! it s coming downstairs.  Not a word about the money while he t stop long.  Not ten minutes, my dear.', 'Only one of my young people, Don', 'Any news?', 'Great.', 'And--and--good?', 'Not bad, any way, I have been prompt enough this time.  Let me have a word with you.', 'Not that infernal hole we were in before,', 'Why, Nance! how pale you are!', 'Pale!', 'Quite horrible.  What have you been doing to yourself?', 'Nothing that I know of, except sitting in this close place for I don  replied the girl carelessly.  s a dear.', 'good-night.', 'Why, burn my body! You look like a corpse come to life again.  What', 'Matter! Nothing.  What do you look at me so hard for?', 'What foolery is this? What is it?  What do you mean?  What are you thinking of?', 'Of many things, Bill, But, Lord!  What odds in that?', 'I tell you wot it is, if you haven  on, now, there re not a-going to--.  No, damme! you wouldn', 'Do what?', 'There ain  said Sikes, fixing his eyes upon her, and muttering the words to himself;  t a stauncher-hearted gal going, or I s got the fever coming on; that', 'Now, come and sit aside of me, and put on your own face; or I t know it agin when you do want it.', 'The laudanum has taken effect at last, I may be too late, even now.', 'Has it long gone the half-hour?', 'It', 'And I cannot get there in less than an hour or more,', 'The woman is mad!', 'Now, young woman! who do you want here?', 'A lady who is stopping in this house,', 'A lady! What lady?', 'Miss Maylie,', 'What name am I to say?', 'It', 'Nor business?', 'No, nor that neither, I must see the lady.', 'Come! None of this. Take yourself off.', 'I shall be carried out if I go! and I can make that a job that two of you won t there anybody here, that will see a simple message carried for a poor wretch like me?', 'Take it up for her, Joe; can', 'What  replied the man.   t suppose the young lady will see such as her; do you?', 'Do what you like with me, but do what I ask you first, and I ask you to give this message for God Almighty', 'but do what I ask you first, and I ask you to give this message for God Almighty', 'What', 'That a young woman earnestly asks to speak to Miss Maylie alone, and that if the lady will only hear the first word she has to say, she will know whether to hear her business, or to have her turned out of doors as an impostor.', 'I say, you', 'You give the message, and let me hear the answer.', 'It', 'Brass can do better than the gold what has stood the fire,', 'It d have been sorry for it one day, and not without reason either.', 'I am very sorry if any one has behaved harshly to you, Do not think of that.  Tell me why you wished to see me. I am the person you inquired for.', 'Do not think of that.  Tell me why you wished to see me. I am the person you inquired for.', 'Oh, lady, lady! if there was more like you, there would be fewer like me,--there would--there would!', 'Sit down, If you are in poverty or affliction I shall be truly glad to relieve you if I can,--I shall indeed.  Sit down.', 'Let me stand, lady, and do not speak to me so kindly till you know me better.  It is growing late. Is--is--that door shut?', 'Yes, Why?', 'Because, I am about to put my life and the lives of others in your hands.  I am the girl that dragged little Oliver back to old Fagin', 'You!', 'I, lady! I am the infamous creature you have heard of, that lives among the thieves, and that never from the first moment I can recollect my eyes and senses opening on London streets have known any better life, or kinder words than they have given me, so help me God!  Do not mind shrinking openly from me, lady.  I am younger than you would think, to look at me, but I am well used to it. The poorest women fall back, as I make my way along the crowded pavement.', 'What dreadful things are these!', 'Thank Heaven upon your knees, dear lady, that you had friends to care for and keep you in your childhood, and that you were never in the midst of cold and hunger, and riot and drunkenness, and--and--something worse than all--as I have been from my cradle.  I may use the word, for the alley and the gutter were mine, as they will be my deathbed.', 'I pity you! It wrings my heart to hear you!', 'Heaven bless you for your goodness! If you knew what I am sometimes, you would pity me, indeed. But I have stolen away from those who would surely murder me, if they knew I had been here, to tell you what I have overheard.  Do you know a man named Monks?', 'No,', 'He knows you, and knew you were here, for it was by hearing him tell the place that I found you out.', 'I never heard the name,', 'Then he goes by some other amongst us, which I more than thought before.  Some time ago, and soon after Oliver was put into your house on the night of the robbery, I--suspecting this man--listened to a conversation held between him and Fagin in the dark. I found out, from what I heard, that Monks--the man I asked you about, you know--', 'Yes, I understand.', '--That Monks, had seen him accidently with two of our boys on the day we first lost him, and had known him directly to be the same child that he was watching for, though I couldn', 'For what purpose?', 'He caught sight of my shadow on the wall as I listened, in the hope of finding out, and there are not many people besides me that could have got out of their way in time to escape discovery.  But I did; and I saw him no more till last night.', 'And what occurred then?', 'I s identity lie at the bottom of the river, and the old hag that received them from the mother is rotting in her coffin."  They laughed, and talked of his success in doing this; and Monks, talking on about the boy, and getting very wild, said that though he had got the young devil d rather have had it the other way; for, what a game it would have been to have brought down the boast of the father', 'What is all this!', 'The truth, lady, though it comes from my lips, Then, he said, with oaths common enough in my ears, but strange to yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boy t, he ll contrive for my young brother, Oliver."', 'Then, he said, with oaths common enough in my ears, but strange to yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boy t, he ll contrive for my young brother, Oliver."', 'His brother!', 'Those were his words, And more. When he spoke of you and the other lady, and said it seemed contrived by Heaven, or the devil, against him, that Oliver should come into your hands, he laughed, and said there was some comfort in that too, for how many thousands and hundreds of thousands of pounds would you not give, if you had them, to know who your two-legged spaniel was.', 'You do not mean, to tell me that this was said in earnest?', 'He spoke in hard and angry earnest, if a man ever did, He is an earnest man when his hatred is up. I know many who do worse things; but I', 'But what can I do? To what use can I turn this communication without you?  Back!  Why do you wish to return to companions you paint in such terrible colors?  If you repeat this information to a gentleman whom I can summon in an instant from the next room, you can be consigned to some place of safety without half an hour', 'I wish to go back, I must go back, because--how can I tell such things to an innocent lady like you?--because among the men I have told you of, there is one: the most desperate among them all; that I can', 'Your having interfered in this dear boy  said Rose;   said the earnest girl, folding her hands as the tears coursed down her face, ', 'your coming here, at so great a risk, to tell me what you have heard; your manner, which convinces me of the truth of what you say; your evident contrition, and sense of shame; all lead me to believe that you might yet be reclaimed.  Oh! do not turn a deaf ear to the entreaties of one of your own sex; the first--the first, I do believe, who ever appealed to you in the voice of pity and compassion.  Do hear my words, and let me save you yet, for better things.', 'Lady, dear, sweet, angel lady, you _are_ the first that ever blessed me with such words as these, and if I had heard them years ago, they might have turned me from a life of sin and sorrow; but it is too late, it is too late!', 'It is never too late, for penitence and atonement.', 'It is, I cannot leave him now!  I could not be his death.', 'Why should you be?', 'Nothing could save him, If I told others what I have told you, and led to their being taken, he would be sure to die. He is the boldest, and has been so cruel!', 'Is it possible, that for such a man as this, you can resign every future hope, and the certainty of immediate rescue?  It is madness.', 'I don  answered the girl;  s wrath for the wrong I have done, I do not know; but I am drawn back to him through every suffering and ill usage; and I should be, I believe, if I knew that I was to die by his hand at last.', 'What am I to do? I should not let you depart from me thus.', 'You should, lady, and I know you will, You will not stop my going because I have trusted in your goodness, and forced no promise from you, as I might have done.', 'You will not stop my going because I have trusted in your goodness, and forced no promise from you, as I might have done.', 'Of what use, then, is the communication you have made? This mystery must be investigated, or how will its disclosure to me, benefit Oliver, whom you are anxious to serve?', 'This mystery must be investigated, or how will its disclosure to me, benefit Oliver, whom you are anxious to serve?', 'You must have some kind gentleman about you that will hear it as a secret, and advise you what to do,', 'But where can I find you again when it is necessary? I do not seek to know where these dreadful people live, but where will you be walking or passing at any settled period from this time?', 'Will you promise me that you will have my secret strictly kept, and come alone, or with the only other person that knows it; and that I shall not be watched or followed?', 'I promise you solemnly,', 'Every Sunday night, from eleven until the clock strikes twelve, I will walk on London Bridge if I am alive.', 'Stay another moment, Think once again on your own condition, and the opportunity you have of escaping from it.  You have a claim on me:  not only as the voluntary bearer of this intelligence, but as a woman lost almost beyond redemption.  Will you return to this gang of robbers, and to this man, when a word can save you?  What fascination is it that can take you back, and make you cling to wickedness and misery?  Oh! is there no chord in your heart that I can touch!  Is there nothing left, to which I can appeal against this terrible infatuation!', 'When ladies as young, and good, and beautiful as you are, give away your hearts, love will carry you all lengths--even such as you, who have home, friends, other admirers, everything, to fill them.  When such as I, who have no certain roof but the coffinlid, and no friend in sickness or death but the hospital nurse, set our rotten hearts on any man, and let him fill the place that has been a blank through all our wretched lives, who can hope to cure us?  Pity us, lady--pity us for having only one feeling of the woman left, and for having that turned, by a heavy judgment, from a comfort and a pride, into a new means of violence and suffering.', 'You will, take some money from me, which may enable you to live without dishonesty--at all events until we meet again?', 'Not a penny,', 'Do not close your heart against all my efforts to help you, I wish to serve you indeed.', 'You would serve me best, lady, if you could take my life at once; for I have felt more grief to think of what I am, to-night, than I ever did before, and it would be something not to die in the hell in which I have lived.  God bless you, sweet lady, and send as much happiness on your head as I have brought shame on mine!', 'if you could take my life at once; for I have felt more grief to think of what I am, to-night, than I ever did before, and it would be something not to die in the hell in which I have lived.  God bless you, sweet lady, and send as much happiness on your head as I have brought shame on mine!', 'If it be painful to him, to come back here, how painful it will be to me!  But perhaps he will not come; he may write, or he may come himself, and studiously abstain from meeting me--he did when he went away.  I hardly thought he would; but it was better for us both.', 'What makes you look so flurried?', 'I hardly know how; I feel as if I should be choked, Oh dear!  To think that I should see him at last, and you should be able to know that I have told you the truth!', 'Oh dear!  To think that I should see him at last, and you should be able to know that I have told you the truth!', 'I never thought you had told us anything but the truth, But what is this?--of whom do you speak?', 'I have seen the gentleman, the gentleman who was so good to me--Mr. Brownlow, that we have so often talked about.', 'Where?', 'Getting out of a coach, and going into a house.  I didn t speak to him, for he didn  said Oliver, opening a scrap of paper,  s where he lives--I', 'and going into a house.  I didn t speak to him, for he didn  said Oliver, opening a scrap of paper,  s where he lives--I', 'Quick! Tell them to fetch a hackney-coach, and be ready to go with me.  I will take you there directly, without a minute', 'Dear me, I beg your pardon, young lady--I imagined it was some importunate person who--I beg you will excuse me.  Be seated, pray.', 'Mr. Brownlow, I believe, sir?', 'That is my name, This is my friend, Mr. Grimwig.  Grimwig, will you leave us for a few minutes?', 'I believe, that at this period of our interview, I need not give that gentleman the trouble of going away. If I am correctly informed, he is cognizant of the business on which I wish to speak to you.', 'I shall surprise you very much, I have no doubt, but you once showed great benevolence and goodness to a very dear young friend of mine, and I am sure you will take an interest in hearing of him again.', 'Indeed!', 'Oliver Twist you knew him as,', 'Do me the favour, my dear young lady, to leave entirely out of the question that goodness and benevolence of which you speak, and of which nobody else knows anything; and if you have it in your power to produce any evidence which will alter the unfavourable opinion I was once induced to entertain of that poor child, in Heaven', 'A bad one!  I', 'He is a child of a noble nature and a warm heart, and that Power which has thought fit to try him beyond his years, has planted in his breast affections and feelings which would do honour to many who have numbered his days six times over.', 'I  said Mr. Grimwig, with the same rigid face.  s in it if this Oliver is not twelve years old at least, I don', 'Do not heed my friend, Miss Maylie, he does not mean what he says.', 'Yes, he does,', 'No, he does not,', 'He t,', 'He would deserve to have it knocked off, if he does,', 'And he', 'Now, Miss Maylie, to return to the subject in which your humanity is so much interested.  Will you let me know what intelligence you have of this poor child:  allowing me to promise that I exhausted every means in my power of discovering him, and that since I have been absent from this country, my first impression that he had imposed upon me, and had been persuaded by his former associates to rob me, has been considerably shaken.', 'Thank God! This is great happiness to me, great happiness.  But you have not told me where he is now, Miss Maylie.  You must pardon my finding fault with you,--but why not have brought him?', 'He is waiting in a coach at the door,', 'At this door!', 'Hush! Don m old enough to be your grandfather. You', 'There is somebody else who should not be forgotten, by the bye, Send Mrs. Bedwin here, if you please.', 'Why, you get blinder every day, Bedwin,', 'Well, that I do, sir, People t improve with age, sir.', 'I could have told you that, but put on your glasses, and see if you can', 'God be good to me! it is my innocent boy!', 'My dear old nurse!', 'He would come back--I knew he would, How well he looks, and how like a gentleman', 'Then what the devil is to be done? Are we to pass a vote of thanks to all these vagabonds, male and female, and beg them to accept a hundred pounds, or so, apiece, as a trifling mark of our esteem, and some slight acknowledgment of their kindness to Oliver?', 'Not exactly that, but we must proceed gently and with great care.', 'Gentleness and care, I', 'Never mind where, But reflect whether sending them anywhere is likely to attain the object we have in view.', 'What object?', 'Simply, the discovery of Oliver', 'Ah! I almost forgot that.', 'I almost forgot that.', 'You see, placing this poor girl entirely out of the question, and supposing it were possible to bring these scoundrels to justice without compromising her safety, what good should we bring about?', 'Hanging a few of them at least, in all probability, and transporting the rest.', 'Very good, but no doubt they will bring that about for themselves in the fulness of time, and if we step in to forestall them, it seems to me that we shall be performing a very Quixotic act, in direct opposition to our own interest--or at least to Oliver', 'How?', 'Thus.  It is quite clear that we shall have extreme difficulty in getting to the bottom of this mystery, unless we can bring this man, Monks, upon his knees.  That can only be done by stratagem, and by catching him when he is not surrounded by these people.  For, suppose he were apprehended, we have no proof against him.  He is not even (so far as we know, or as the facts appear to us) concerned with the gang in any of their robberies. If he were not discharged, it is very unlikely that he could receive any further punishment than being committed to prison as a rogue and vagabond; and of course ever afterwards his mouth would be so obstinately closed that he might as well, for our purposes, be deaf, dumb, blind, and an idiot.', 'Then, I put it to you again, whether you think it reasonable that this promise to the girl should be considered binding; a promise made with the best and kindest intentions, but really--', 'Do not discuss the point, my dear young lady, pray, The promise shall be kept.  I don', 'I should like, to call in the aid of my friend Grimwig.  He is a strange creature, but a shrewd one, and might prove of material assistance to us; I should say that he was bred a lawyer, and quitted the Bar in disgust because he had only one brief and a motion of course, in twenty years, though whether that is recommendation or not, you must determine for yourselves.', 'I have no objection to your calling in your friend if I may call in mine,', 'We must put it to the vote, who may he be?', 'That lady s--very old friend,', 'We stay in town, of course, while there remains the slightest prospect of prosecuting this inquiry with a chance of success.  I will spare neither trouble nor expense in behalf of the object in which we are all so deeply interested, and I am content to remain here, if it be for twelve months, so long as you assure me that any hope remains.', 'Good! And as I see on the faces about me, a disposition to inquire how it happened that I was not in the way to corroborate Oliver', 'Come on, can', 'It', 'Heavy!  What are yer talking about?  What are yer made for? Oh, there yer are, resting again! Well, if yer ain s patience out, I don', 'Is it much farther?', 'Much farther!  Yer as good as there, Look there!  Those are the lights of London.', 'They', 'Never mind whether they  said Noah Claypole; for he it was;  ll kick yer, and so I give yer notice.', 'Where do you mean to stop for the night, Noah?', 'How should I know?', 'Near, I hope,', 'No, not near, There!  Not near; so don', 'Why not?', 'When I tell yer that I don s enough, without any why or because either,', 'Well, you needn', 'A pretty thing it would be, wouldn  said Mr. Claypole in a jeering tone.   Cod, yer may thanks yer stars I t gone, at first, the wrong road a purpose, and come back across country, yer', 'Cod, yer may thanks yer stars I t gone, at first, the wrong road a purpose, and come back across country, yer', 'I know I ain  replied Charlotte;  t put all the blame on me, and say I should have been locked up.  You would have been if I had been, any way.', 'Yer took the money from the till, yer know yer did,', 'I took it for you, Noah, dear,', 'Did I keep it?', 'No; you trusted in me, and let me carry it like a dear, and so you are,', 'So give us the bundle, s shoulders, and slinging it over his own;  t yer speak, except when yer spoke to.  What', 'Cripples,', 'Three Cripples, and a very good sign too.  Now, then! Keep close at my heels, and come along.', 'Is this the Three Cripples?', 'That is the dabe of this ', 'A gentleman we met on the road, coming up from the country, recommended us here, We want to sleep here to-night.', 'I  said Barney, who was the attendant sprite;  ll idquire.', 'but I', 'Show us the tap, and give us a bit of cold meat and a drop of beer while yer inquiring, will yer?', 'Hush! stradegers id the next roob.', 'Strangers!', 'Ah!  Ad rub uds too, Frob the cuttry, but subthig in your way, or I', 'Aha! I like that fellow d be of use to us; he knows how to train the girl already. Don em talk--let me hear ', 'So I mean to be a gentleman, No more jolly old coffins, Charlotte, but a gentleman', 'I should like that well enough, dear, but tills ain', 'Tills be blowed! there', 'What do you mean?', 'Pockets, women', 'But you can', 'I shall look out to get into company with them as can, They', 'They', 'Lor, how nice it is to hear yer say so!', 'There, that t yer be too affectionate, in case I  said Noah, disengaging himself with great gravity.   em, and follering  ve got,--especially as we don', 'em, and follering  ve got,--especially as we don', 'A pleasant night, sir, but cool for the time of year, From the country, I see, sir?', 'How do yer see that?', 'We have not so much dust as that in London,', 'Yer a sharp feller, Ha! ha! only hear that, Charlotte!', 'Why, one need be sharp in this town, my dear, and that', 'Good stuff that,', 'Dear! A man need be always emptying a till, or a pocket, or a woman', 'Don  said Fagin, drawing his chair closer. ', 'I didn  stammered Noah, no longer stretching out his legs like an independent gentleman, but coiling them up as well as he could under his chair;  ve got it now, Charlotte, yer know yer have.', 'No matter who  replied Fagin, glancing, nevertheless, with a hawk I', 'In what way?', 'In that way of business, and so are the people of the house.  You ve said the word, and you may make your minds easy.', 'I  said Fagin, after he had reassured the girl, by dint of friendly nods and muttered encouragements. ', 'Yer speak as if yer were in earnest,', 'What advantage would it be to me to be anything else? Here!  Let me have a word with you outside.', 'There  said Noah, getting his legs by gradual degrees abroad again.  ll take the luggage upstairs the while.  Charlotte, see to them bundles.', 'She t she?', 'Quite perfect, You', 'Why, I suppose if I wasn t be here, But, I say, she', 'Now, what do you think? If you was to like my friend, could you do better than join him?', 'Is he in a good way of business; that', 'The top of the tree; employs a power of hands; has the very best society in the profession.', 'Regular town-maders?', 'Not a countryman among  t think he t run rather short of assistants just now,', 'Should I have to hand over?', 'It couldn', 'Twenty pound, though--it', 'Not when it t get rid of, Number and date taken, I suppose?  Payment stopped at the Bank? Ah!  It ll have to go abroad, and he couldn', 'When could I see him?', 'To-morrow morning.', 'Where?', 'Here.', 'Um! What', 'Live like a gentleman--board and lodging, pipes and spirits free--half of all you earn, and half of all the young woman earns,', 'But, yer see, as she will be able to do a good deal, I should like to take something very light.', 'A little fancy work?', 'Ah! something of that sort, What do you think would suit me now?  Something not too trying for the strength, and not very dangerous, you know.  That', 'I heard you talk of something in the spy way upon the others, my dear, My friend wants somebody who would do that well, very much.', 'Why, I did mention that, and I shouldn  rejoined Mr. Claypole slowly;  t pay by itself, you know.', 'That  observed the Jew, ruminating or pretending to ruminate. ', 'No, it might not.', 'What do you think, then? Something in the sneaking way, where it was pretty sure work, and not much more risk than being at home.', 'Something in the sneaking way, where it was pretty sure work, and not much more risk than being at home.', 'What do you think of the old ladies? There', 'Don  asked Noah, shaking his head.   t think that would answer my purpose.  Ain', 'Stop! s knee.  ', 'What', 'The kinchins, my dear, is the young children that ve always got it ready in their hands,--then knock ', 'Ha! ha! Lord, that', 'Lord, that', 'To be sure it is, and you can have a few good beats chalked out in Camden Town, and Battle Bridge, and neighborhoods like that, where they', 'Well, that  said Noah, when he had recovered himself, and Charlotte had returned.  ', 'Will ten do? What name shall I tell my good friend.', 'What name shall I tell my good friend.', 'Mr. Bolter, Mr. Morris Bolter.  This is Mrs. Bolter.', 'Mrs. Bolter  said Fagin, bowing with grotesque politeness.  ', 'Do you hear the gentleman, Charlotte?', 'Yes, Noah, dear!', 'She calls me Noah, as a sort of fond way of talking, You understand?', 'Oh yes, I understand--perfectly, Good-night!  Good-night!', 'And so it was you that was your own friend, was it? s house.   Cod, I thought as much last night!', 'Every man  replied Fagin, with his most insinuating grin.   t as good a one as himself anywhere.', 'Except sometimes, Some people are nobody', 'Don  said Fagin.   s his own enemy, it s too much his own friend; not because he t such a thing in nature.', 'There oughn', 'That stands to reason.  Some conjurers say that number three is the magic number, and some say number seven.  It', 'Ha! ha! Number one for ever.', 'In a little community like ours, my dear, we have a general number one, without considering me too as the same, and all the other young people.', 'Oh, the devil!', 'You see, we are so mixed up together, and identified in our interests, that it must be so.  For instance, it', 'Certainly, Yer about right there.', 'Well!  You can', 'Number two, you mean,', 'No, I don  retorted Fagin.   m of the same importance to you, as you are to yourself.', 'I say, yer a very nice man, and I t quite so thick together, as all that comes to.', 'Only think, only consider.  You s a very pretty thing, and what I love you for doing; but what at the same time would put the cravat round your throat, that', 'The gallows, the gallows, my dear, is an ugly finger-post, which points out a very short and sharp turning that has stopped many a bold fellow', 'Of course it is, What do yer talk about such things for?', 'Only to show you my meaning clearly, To be able to do that, you depend upon me. To keep my little business all snug, I depend upon you. The first is your number one, the second my number one.  The more you value your number one, the more careful you must be of mine; so we come at last to what I told you at first--that a regard for number one holds us all together, and must do so, unless we would all go to pieces in company.', 'That  rejoined Mr. Bolter, thoughtfully.  ', 'It  said Fagin.  ', 'You don', 'No, no, not so bad as that.  Not quite so bad.', 'What, I suppose he was--', 'Wanted, Yes, he was wanted.', 'Very particular?', 'No, not very.  He was charged with attempting to pick a pocket, and they found a silver snuff-box on him,--his own, my dear, his own, for he took snuff himself, and was very fond of it.  They remanded him till to-day, for they thought they knew the owner.  Ah! he was worth fifty boxes, and I', 'Well, but I shall know him, I hope; don', 'I  replied Fagin, with a sigh.   t get any fresh evidence, it s a case of lagging.  They know what a clever lad he is; he ll make the Artful nothing less than a lifer.', 'What do you mean by lagging and a lifer? What t yer speak so as I can understand yer?', 'transportation for life,', 'It', 'What do you mean?', 'They s a coming to  s booked for a passage out, I must have a full suit of mourning, Fagin, and a hatband, to wisit him in, afore he sets out upon his travels.  To think of Jack Dawkins--lummy Jack--the Dodger--the Artful Dodger--going abroad for a common twopenny-halfpenny sneeze-box!  I never thought he t he rob some rich old gentleman of all his walables, and go out as a gentleman, and not like a common prig, without no honour nor glory!', 'What do you talk about his having neither honour nor glory for! Wasn', 'Not one, not one.', 'not one.', 'Then what do you talk of? what are you blubbering for?', "'Cause it isn  said Charley, chafed into perfect defiance of his venerable friend by the current of his regrets;  cause it can dictment;  raps not be there at all.  Oh, my eye, my eye, wot a blow it is!", "'cause it can dictment;  raps not be there at all.  Oh, my eye, my eye, wot a blow it is!", 'Ha! ha! see what a pride they take in their profession, my dear.  Ain', 'Never mind, Charley, it ll be sure to come out.  They ll show it himself, and not disgrace his old pals and teachers.  Think how young he is too!  What a distinction, Charley, to be lagged at his time of life!', 'Well, it is a honour that is!', 'He shall have all he wants, He shall be kept in the Stone Jug, Charley, like a gentleman.  Like a gentleman!  With his beer every day, and money in his pocket to pitch and toss with, if he can', 'No, shall he though?', 'Ay, that he shall, and we s got the greatest gift of the gab:  to carry on his defence; and he shall make a speech for himself too, if he likes; and we', 'Ha! ha! what a lark that would be, wouldn em wouldn', 'Would! He shall--he will!', 'Ah, to be sure, so he will,', 'I think I see him now,', 'So do I, Ha! ha! ha! so do I.  I see it all afore me, upon my soul I do, Fagin.  What a game!  What a regular game! All the big-wigs trying to look solemn, and Jack Dawkins addressing of  s own son making a speech arter dinner--ha! ha! ha!', 'em as intimate and comfortable as if he was the judge', 'We must know how he gets on to-day, by some handy means or other, Let me think.', 'Shall I go?', 'Not for the world, Are you mad, my dear, stark mad, that you', 'You don', 'That wouldn', 'Then why don  asked Master Bates, laying his hand on Noah Nobody knows him.', 'Why, if he didn', 'Mind! What should he have to mind?', 'Really nothing, my dear, really nothing.', 'Oh, I dare say about that, yer know, No, no--none of that.  It t.', 'Wot department has he got, Fagin? s lank form with much disgust.   s anything wrong, and the eating all the wittles when there', 'Never mind, and don ll find yerself in the wrong shop.', 'Hold your tongue, will you?', 'I t I? Where are my priwileges?', 'You  retorted the jailer,  em.', 'We t, Now then!  Wot is this here business?  I shall thank the madg ve got an appointment with a genelman in the City, and as I am a man of my word and wery punctual in business matters, he t there to my time, and then pr t be an action for damage against them as kep me away.  Oh no, certainly not!', 'Silence there!', 'What is this?', 'A pick-pocketing case, your worship.', 'Has the boy ever been here before?', 'He ought to have been, a many times, He has been pretty well everywhere else.  _I_ know him well, your worship.', 'Oh! you know me, do you? Wery good.  That', 'Now then, where are the witnesses?', 'Ah! that  added the Dodger.   em.', 'Have you anything to ask this witness, boy?', 'I wouldn', 'Have you anything to say at all?', 'Do you hear his worship ask if you', 'I beg your pardon, Did you redress yourself to me, my man?', 'I never see such an out-and-out young wagabond, your worship, Do you mean to say anything, you young shaver?', 'No, not here, for this ain spectable circle of acquaintance as d never been born, or that they em up to their own hat-pegs, afore they let  ll--', 'There!  He  interposed the clerk. ', 'Come on,', 'Oh ah!  I  replied the Dodger, brushing his hat with the palm of his hand.   s no use your looking frightened; I won porth of it.  _You t be you for something!  I wouldn', 'An hour this side of midnight, Dark and heavy it is too. A good night for business this.', 'Ah! What a pity, Bill, my dear, that there', 'You  replied Sikes gruffly.   m in the humour too.', 'We must make up for lost time when we s all I know,', 'That  replied Fagin, venturing to pat him on the shoulder.  ', 'Does you good, does it! Well, so be it.', 'Ha! ha! ha! You', 'I don  said Sikes, casting off the Jew', 'It make you nervous, Bill,--reminds you of being nabbed, does it?', 'Reminds me of being nabbed by the devil, There never was another man with such a face as yours, unless it was your father, and I suppose _he_ is singeing his grizzled red beard by this time, unless you came straight from the old  t wonder at, a bit.', 'Hallo! Nance.  Where', 'Not far.', 'What answer  retorted Sikes.  ', 'I don', 'Then I do, Nowhere.  Sit down.', 'Nowhere.  Sit down.', 'I  rejoined the girl.  ', 'Put your head out of the winder,', 'There  said the girl.  ', 'Then you won  replied Sikes.  With which assurance he rose, locked the door, took the key out, and pulling her bonnet from her head, flung it up to the top of an old press.    said the robber.  ', 'It  said the girl turning very pale.   re doing?', 'Know what I  cried Sikes, turning to Fagin,  s out of her senses, you know, or she daren', 'You  muttered the girl placing both hands upon her breast, as though to keep down by force some violent outbreak.  ', 'No!', 'Tell him to let me go, Fagin.  He had better.  It', 'Hear you! Aye!  And if I hear you for half a minute longer, the dog shall have such a grip on your throat as', 'Aye!  And if I hear you for half a minute longer, the dog shall have such a grip on your throat as', 'Let me go, Bill, let me go; you don t, indeed.  For only one hour--do--do!', 'Cut my limbs off one by one! If I don s stark raving mad.  Get up.', 'Not till you let me go--not till you let me go--Never--never!', 'Whew! Wot a precious strange gal that is!', 'Wot a precious strange gal that is!', 'You may say that, Bill, You may say that.', 'Wot did she take it into her head to go out to-night for, do you think? Come; you should know her better than me. Wot does it mean?', 'Obstinacy; woman', 'Well, I suppose it is, I thought I had tamed her, but she', 'Worse, I never knew her like this, for such a little cause.', 'Nor I, I think she t come out--eh?', 'Like enough.', 'I s took that way again,', 'She was hanging about me all day, and night too, when I was stretched on my back; and you, like a blackhearted wolf as you are, kept yourself aloof, We was poor too, all the time, and I think, one way or other, it', 'That  replied the Jew in a whisper.  ', 'Why, now she', 'Light him down, It', 'What is it, Nancy, dear?', 'What do you mean?', 'The reason of all this, If _he_ is so hard with you (he t you--', 'Well?', 'No matter just now.  We', 'I know you well, Good-night.', 'With a little persuasion, what more likely than that she would consent to poison him?  Women have done such things, and worse, to secure the same object before now.  There would be the dangerous villain:  the man I hate:  gone; another secured in his place; and my influence over the girl, with a knowledge of this crime to back it, unlimited.', 'I can, She durst not refuse me then.  Not for her life, not for her life!  I have it all.  The means are ready, and shall be set to work.  I shall have you yet!', 'Bolter,', 'Well, here I am, What t yer ask me to do anything till I have done eating. That', 'You can talk as you eat, can  said Fagin, cursing his dear young friend', 'Oh yes, I can talk.  I get on better when I talk, Where', 'Out, I sent her out this morning with the other young woman, because I wanted us to be alone.', 'Oh! I wish yer t interrupt me.', 'You did well yesterday, my dear, Beautiful!  Six shillings and ninepence halfpenny on the very first day!  The kinchin lay will be a fortune to you.', 'Don', 'No, no, my dear.  The pint-pots were great strokes of genius: but the milk-can was a perfect masterpiece.', 'Pretty well, I think, for a beginner, The pots I took off airy railings, and the milk-can was standing by itself outside a public-house.  I thought it might get rusty with the rain, or catch cold, yer know.  Eh?  Ha! ha! ha!', 'I want you, Bolter, to do a piece of work for me, my dear, that needs great care and caution.', 'I say, don  yer police-offices. That don t; and so I tell yer.', 'That  said the Jew;  s only to dodge a woman.', 'An old woman?', 'A young one,', 'I can do that pretty well, I know, I was a regular cunning sneak when I was at school.  What am I to dodge her for?  Not to--', 'Not to do anything, but to tell me where she goes, who she sees, and, if possible, what she says; to remember the street, if it is a street, or the house, if it is a house; and to bring me back all the information you can.', 'What', 'If you do it well, a pound, my dear.  One pound, And that t valuable consideration to be gained.', 'Who is she?', 'One of us.', 'Oh Lor! Yer doubtful of her, are yer?', 'She has found out some new friends, my dear, and I must know who they are,', 'I see, Just to have the pleasure of knowing them, if they m your man.', 'I knew you would be,', 'Of course, of course, Where is she? Where am I to wait for her?  Where am I to go?', 'All that, my dear, you shall hear from me.  I  said Fagin.  ', 'She goes abroad to-night, and on the right errand, I', 'Is that the woman?', 'I can  whispered Noah.  ', 'Stay there,', 'I see her now,', 'Plainly?', 'I should know her among a thousand.', 'Hist! Dow.', 'To the left, take the left had, and keep od the other side.', 'Not here, I am afraid to speak to you here. Come away--out of the public road--down the steps yonder!', 'This is far enough, I will not suffer the young lady to go any farther.  Many people would have distrusted you too much to have come even so far, but you see I am willing to humour you.', 'To humour me! You s no matter.', 'You s no matter.', 'Why, for what, for what purpose can you have brought us to this strange place?  Why not have let me speak to you, above there, where it is light, and there is something stirring, instead of bringing us to this dark and dismal hole?', 'I told you before, that I was afraid to speak to you there.  I don  said the girl, shuddering, ', 'A fear of what?', 'I scarcely know of what, I wish I did. Horrible thoughts of death, and shrouds with blood upon them, and a fear that has made me burn as if I was on fire, have been upon me all day.  I was reading a book to-night, to wile the time away, and the same things came into the print.', 'Imagination,', 'No imagination, I', 'There is nothing unusual in that, They have passed me often.', '_Real ones_, This was not.', 'Speak to her kindly, Poor creature!  She seems to need it.', 'Your haughty religious people would have held their heads up to see me as I am to-night, and preached of flames and vengeance, Oh, dear lady, why ar t those who claim to be God', 'Ah! A Turk turns his face, after washing it well, to the East, when he says his prayers; these good people, after giving their faces such a rub against the World as to take the smiles off, turn with no less regularity, to the darkest side of Heaven. Between the Mussulman and the Pharisee, commend me to the first!', 'You were not here last Sunday night,', 'I couldn  replied Nancy; ', 'By whom?', 'Him that I told the young lady of before.', 'You were not suspected of holding any communication with anybody on the subject which has brought us here to-night, I hope?', 'No, It t give him a drink of laudanum before I came away.', 'Did he awake before you returned?', 'No; and neither he nor any of them suspect me.', 'Good, Now listen to me.', 'I am ready,', 'This young lady, has communicated to me, and to some other friends who can be safely trusted, what you told her nearly a fortnight since.  I confess to you that I had doubts, at first, whether you were to be implicitly relied upon, but now I firmly believe you are.', 'I am,', 'I repeat that I firmly believe it.  To prove to you that I am disposed to trust you, I tell you without reserve, that we propose to extort the secret, whatever it may be, from the fear of this man Monks.  But if--if-- he cannot be secured, or, if secured, cannot be acted upon as we wish, you must deliver up the Jew.', 'Fagin,', 'That man must be delivered up by you,', 'I will not do it!  I will never do it! Devil that he is, and worse than devil as he has been to me, I will never do that.', 'You will not?', 'Never!', 'Tell me why?', 'For one reason, for one reason, that the lady knows and will stand by me in, I know she will, for I have her promise:  and for this other reason, besides, that, bad life as he has led, I have led a bad life too; there are many of us who have kept the same courses together, and I t, bad as they are.', 'Then, put Monks into my hands, and leave him to me to deal with.', 'What if he turns against the others?', 'I promise you that in that case, if the truth is forced from him, there the matter will rest; there must be circumstances in Oliver', 'And if it is not?', 'Then, this Fagin shall not be brought to justice without your consent.  In such a case I could show you reasons, I think, which would induce you to yield it.', 'Have I the lady', 'You have, My true and faithful pledge.', 'Monks would never learn how you knew what you do?', 'Never, The intelligence should be brought to bear upon him, that he could never even guess.', 'I have been a liar, and among liars from a little child, but I will take your words.', 'He is tall, and a strongly made man, but not stout; he has a lurking walk; and as he walks, constantly looks over his shoulder, first on one side, and then on the other. Don s, that you might almost tell him by that alone.  His face is dark, like his hair and eyes; and, although he can', 'Part of this, I have drawn out from other people at the house I tell you of, for I have only seen him twice, and both times he was covered up in a large cloak.  I think that  she added.  ', 'A broad red mark, like a burn or scald?', 'How  said the girl.  ', 'I think I do, I should by your description.  We shall see.  Many people are singularly like each other.  It may not be the same.', 'Now, you have given us most valuable assistance, young woman, and I wish you to be the better for it. What can I do to serve you?', 'Nothing,', 'You will not persist in saying that, Think now.  Tell me.', 'Nothing, sir, You can do nothing to help me.  I am past all hope, indeed.', 'You put yourself beyond its pale, The past has been a dreary waste with you, of youthful energies mis-spent, and such priceless treasures lavished, as the Creator bestows but once and never grants again, but, for the future, you may hope. I do not say that it is in our power to offer you peace of heart and mind, for that must come as you seek it; but a quiet asylum, either in England, or, if you fear to remain here, in some foreign country, it is not only within the compass of our ability but our most anxious wish to secure you. Before the dawn of morning, before this river wakes to the first glimpse of day-light, you shall be placed as entirely beyond the reach of your former associates, and leave as utter an absence of all trace behind you, as if you were to disappear from the earth this moment.  Come!  I would not have you go back to exchange one word with any old companion, or take one look at any old haunt, or breathe the very air which is pestilence and death to you.  Quit them all, while there is time and opportunity!', 'She will be persuaded now, She hesitates, I am sure.', 'I fear not, my dear,', 'No sir, I do not, I am chained to my old life.  I loathe and hate it now, but I cannot leave it.  I must have gone too far to turn back,--and yet I don  she said, looking hastily round, ', 'Home!', 'Home, lady, To such a home as I have raised for myself with the work of my whole life.  Let us part. I shall be watched or seen.  Go!  Go!  If I have done you any service all I ask is, that you leave me, and let me go my way alone.', 'It is useless, We compromise her safety, perhaps, by staying here.  We may have detained her longer than she expected already.', 'Yes, yes, You have.', 'What, can be the end of this poor creature', 'What! Look before you, lady.  Look at that dark water.  How many times do you read of such as I who spring into the tide, and leave no living thing, to care for, or bewail them.  It may be years hence, or it may be only months, but I shall come to that at last.', 'Do not speak thus, pray,', 'It will never reach your ears, dear lady, and God forbid such horrors should! Good-night, good-night!', 'This purse, Take it for my sake, that you may have some resource in an hour of need and trouble.', 'No! I have not done this for money.  Let me have that to think of.  And yet--give me something that you have worn:  I should like to have something--no, no, not a ring--your gloves or handkerchief--anything that I can keep, as having belonged to you, sweet lady.  There.  Bless you!  God bless you. Good-night, good-night!', 'Hark! Did she call!  I thought I heard her voice.', 'No, my love, She has not moved, and will not till we are gone.', 'At last, At last!', 'There! Take care of that, and do the most you can with it.  It', 'Wot now? Wot do you look at a man so for?', 'Damme! He', 'No, no, It re not the person, Bill.  I', 'Oh, you haven t you? That t matter.', 'I  said Fagin, drawing his chair nearer, ', 'Aye? Tell away! Look sharp, or Nance will think I', 'Lost! She has pretty well settled that, in her own mind, already.', 'Speak, will you! or if you don ve got to say in plain words. Out with it, you thundering old cur, out with it!', 'Suppose that lad that', 'Suppose that lad, was to peach--to blow upon us all--first seeking out the right folks for the purpose, and then having a meeting with  ve all been in, more or less--of his own fancy; not grabbed, trapped, tried, earwigged by the parson and brought to it on bread and water,--but of his own fancy; to please his own taste; stealing out at nights to find those most interested against us, and peaching to them.  Do you hear me? Suppose he did all this, what then?', 'What then! If he was left alive till I came, I', 'What if I did it! I, that knows so much, and could hang so many besides myself!', 'I don  replied Sikes, clenching his teeth and turning white at the mere suggestion.   d do something in the jail that  d fall upon you with them in the open court, and beat your brains out afore the people. I should have such strength, that I could smash your head as if a loaded waggon had gone over it.', 'You would?', 'Would I! Try me.', 'If it was Charley, or the Dodger, or Bet, or--', 'I don  replied Sikes impatiently.   d serve them the same.', 'Bolter, Bolter!  Poor lad! He', 'He', 'Wot d', 'Tell me that again--once again, just for him to hear,', 'Tell yer what?', 'That about-- _Nancy_, You followed her?', 'Yes.', 'To London Bridge?', 'Yes.', 'Where she met two people.', 'So she did.', 'A gentleman and a lady that she had gone to of her own accord before, who asked her to give up all her pals, and Monks first, which she did--and to describe him, which she did--and to tell her what house it was that we meet at, and go to, which she did--and where it could be best watched from, which she did--and what time the people went there, which she did.  She did all this.  She told it all every word without a threat, without a murmur--she did--did she not?', 'All right, That', 'What did they say, about last Sunday?', 'About last Sunday! Why I told yer that before.', 'Again.  Tell it again!', 'They asked her, they asked her why she didn t.', 'Why--why?  Tell him that.', 'Because she was forcibly kept at home by Bill, the man she had told them of before,', 'What more of him? What more of the man she had told them of before?  Tell him that, tell him that.', 'Why, that she couldn  said Noah; ', 'Hell  cried Sikes, breaking fiercely from the Jew.  ', 'Bill, Bill! A word. Only a word.', 'Let me out, Don s not safe. Let me out, I say!', 'Hear me speak a word, You won', 'You won', 'Well,', 'You won', 'I mean, not too violent for safety.  Be crafty, Bill, and not too bold.', 'Get up!', 'It is you, Bill!', 'It is, Get up.', 'Let it be, There ve got to do.', 'Bill, why do you look like that at me!', 'Bill, Bill! I--I won', 'You know, you she devil! You were watched to-night; every word you said was heard.', 'You were watched to-night; every word you said was heard.', 'Then spare my life for the love of Heaven, as I spared yours, Bill, dear Bill, you cannot have the heart to kill me.  Oh! think of all I have given up, only this one night, for you.  You _shall_ have time to think, and save yourself this crime; I will not loose my hold, you cannot throw me off.  Bill, Bill, for dear God', 'Bill, the gentleman and that dear lady, told me to-night of a home in some foreign country where I could end my days in solitude and peace.  Let me see them again, and beg them, on my knees, to show the same mercy and goodness to you; and let us both leave this dreadful place, and far apart lead better lives, and forget how we have lived, except in prayers, and never see each other more. It is never too late to repent. They told me so--I feel it now--but we must have time--a little, little time!', 'And what be that stoof?  Good to eat, Harry?', 'This, this is the infallible and invaluable composition for removing all sorts of stain, rust, dirt, mildew, spick, speck, spot, or spatter, from silk, satin, linen, cambric, cloth, crape, stuff, carpet, merino, muslin, bombazeen, or woollen stuff.  Wine-stains, fruit-stains, beer-stains, water-stains, paint-stains, pitch-stains, any stains, all come out at one rub with the infallible and invaluable composition.  If a lady stains her honour, she has only need to swallow one cake and she s poison.  If a gentleman wants to prove this, he has only need to bolt one little square, and he has put it beyond question--for it', 'It  said the fellow.  t make it fast enough, though the men work so hard that they die off, and the widows is pensioned directly, with twenty pound a-year for each of the children, and a premium of fifty for twins.  One penny a square!  Two half-pence is all the same, and four farthings is received with joy.  One penny a square! Wine-stains, fruit-stains, beer-stains, water-stains, paint-stains, pitch-stains, mud-stains, blood-stains!  Here is a stain upon the hat of a gentleman in company, that I', 'Hah! Give that back.', 'I  replied the man, winking to the company,  s hat, no wider than a shilling, but thicker than a half-crown.  Whether it is a wine-stain, fruit-stain, beer-stain, water-stain, paint-stain, pitch-stain, mud-stain, or blood-stain--', 'before you can come across the room to get it. Gentlemen all, observe the dark stain upon this gentleman', 'That  said the guard.   ere bag, it warn t do, you know!', 'Anything new up in town, Ben?', 'No, nothing that I knows on, Corn t reckon much upon it.', 'Corn t reckon much upon it.', 'Oh, that  said a gentleman inside, who was looking out of the window.  ', 'Was it, sir? Man or woman, pray, sir?', 'A woman, It is supposed--', 'Now, Ben,', 'Damn that   said the guard; ', 'Coming!', 'Coming, Ah, and so ooman of property that t know when. Here, give hold.  All ri--ight!', 'There  he thought.  ll never expect to nab me there, after this country scent.  Why can ll risk it.', 'Do you hear me call?  Come here!', 'Come back!', 'He knows the alternative, If he hesitates or moves a finger but as you bid him, drag him into the street, call for the aid of the police, and impeach him as a felon in my name.', 'How dare you say this of me?', 'How dare you urge me to it, young man? Are you mad enough to leave this house?  Unhand him.  There, sir. You are free to go, and we to follow. But I warn you, by all I hold most solemn and most sacred, that instant will have you apprehended on a charge of fraud and robbery.  I am resolute and immoveable.  If you are determined to be the same, your blood be upon your own head!', 'By what authority am I kidnapped in the street, and brought here by these dogs?', 'By mine, Those persons are indemnified by me. If you complain of being deprived of your liberty--you had power and opportunity to retrieve it as you came along, but you deemed it advisable to remain quiet--I say again, throw yourself for protection on the law.  I will appeal to the law too; but when you have gone too far to recede, do not sue to me for leniency, when the power will have passed into other hands; and do not say I plunged you down the gulf into which you rushed, yourself.', 'You will decide quickly, If you wish me to prefer my charges publicly, and consign you to a punishment the extent of which, although I can, with a shudder, foresee, I cannot control, once more, I say, for you know the way.  If not, and you appeal to my forbearance, and the mercy of those you have deeply injured, seat yourself, without a word, in that chair. It has waited for you two whole days.', 'You will be prompt, A word from me, and the alternative has gone for ever.', 'I have not the inclination to parley, and, as I advocate the dearest interests of others, I have not the right.', 'Is there-- is there--no middle course?', 'None.', 'Lock the door on the outside, and come when I ring.', 'and come when I ring.', 'This is pretty treatment, sir, from my father', 'It is because I was your father  returned Mr. Brownlow;   death-bed when he was yet a boy, on the morning that would--but Heaven willed otherwise--have made her my young wife; it is because my seared heart clung to him, from that time forth, through all his trials and errors, till he died; it is because old recollections and associations filled my heart, and even the sight of you brings with it old thoughts of him; it is because of all these things that I am moved to treat you gently now--yes, Edward Leeford, even now--and blush for your unworthiness who bear the name.', 'What has the name to do with it? What is the name to me?', 'Nothing, nothing to you.  But it was _hers_, and even at this distance of time brings back to me, an old man, the glow and thrill which I once felt, only to hear it repeated by a stranger.  I am very glad you have changed it--very--very.', 'This is all mighty fine, But what do you want with me?', 'You have a brother, a brother, the whisper of whose name in your ear when I came behind you in the street, was, in itself, almost enough to make you accompany me hither, in wonder and alarm.', 'I have no brother, You know I was an only child. Why do you talk to me of brothers?  You know that, as well as I.', 'Attend to what I do know, and you may not, I shall interest you by and by.  I know that of the wretched marriage, into which family pride, and the most sordid and narrowest of all ambition, forced your unhappy father when a mere boy, you were the sole and most unnatural issue.', 'I don  interrupted Monks with a jeering laugh.  s enough for me.', 'You know the fact, and that', 'But I also know, the misery, the slow torture, the protracted anguish of that ill-assorted union. I know how listlessly and wearily each of that wretched pair dragged on their heavy chain through a world that was poisoned to them both.  I know how cold formalities were succeeded by open taunts; how indifference gave place to dislike, dislike to hate, and hate to loathing, until at last they wrenched the clanking bond asunder, and retiring a wide space apart, carried each a galling fragment, of which nothing but death could break the rivets, to hide it in new society beneath the gayest looks they could assume.  Your mother succeeded; she forgot it soon. But it rusted and cankered at your father', 'Well, they were separated, and what of that?', 'When they had been separated for some time, and your mother, wholly given up to continental frivolities, had utterly forgotten the young husband ten good years her junior, who, with prospects blighted, lingered on at home, he fell among new friends.  This circumstance, at least, you know already.', 'and your mother, wholly given up to continental frivolities, had utterly forgotten the young husband ten good years her junior, who, with prospects blighted, lingered on at home, he fell among new friends.  This circumstance, at least, you know already.', 'Not I, Not I.', 'Your manner, no less than your actions, assures me that you have never forgotten it, or ceased to think of it with bitterness, I speak of fifteen years ago, when you were not more than eleven years old, and your father but one-and-thirty--for he was, I repeat, a boy, when _his_ father ordered him to marry. Must I go back to events which cast a shade upon the memory of your parent, or will you spare it, and disclose to me the truth?', 'I have nothing to disclose, You must talk on if you will.', 'These new friends, then, were a naval officer retired from active service, whose wife had died some half-a-year before, and left him with two children--there had been more, but, of all their family, happily but two survived. They were both daughters; one a beautiful creature of nineteen, and the other a mere child of two or three years old.', 'What', 'They resided, in a part of the country to which your father in his wandering had repaired, and where he had taken up his abode. Acquaintance, intimacy, friendship, fast followed on each other. Your father was gifted as few men are.  He had his sister', 'The end of a year found him contracted, solemnly contracted, to that daughter; the object of the first, true, ardent, only passion of a guileless girl.', 'Your tale is of the longest,', 'It is a true tale of grief and trial, and sorrow, young man, and such tales usually are; if it were one of unmixed joy and happiness, it would be very brief.  At length one of those rich relations to strengthen whose interest and importance your father had been sacrificed, as others are often--it is no uncommon case--died, and to repair the misery he had been instrumental in occasioning, left him his panacea for all griefs--Money.  It was necessary that he should immediately repair to Rome, whither this man had sped for health, and where he had died, leaving his affairs in great confusion.  He went; was seized with mortal illness there; was followed, the moment the intelligence reached Paris, by your mother who carried you with her; he died the day after her arrival, leaving no will--_no will_--so that the whole property fell to her and you.', 'Before he went abroad, and as he passed through London on his way, s face, ', 'he came to me.', 'I never heard of that,', 'He came to me, and left with me, among some other things, a picture--a portrait painted by himself--a likeness of this poor girl--which he did not wish to leave behind, and could not carry forward on his hasty journey.  He was worn by anxiety and remorse almost to a shadow; talked in a wild, distracted way, of ruin and dishonour worked by himself; confided to me his intention to convert his whole property, at any loss, into money, and, having settled on his wife and you a portion of his recent acquisition, to fly the country--I guessed too well he would not fly alone--and never see it more.  Even from me, his old and early friend, whose strong attachment had taken root in the earth that covered one most dear to both--even from me he withheld any more particular confession, promising to write and tell me all, and after that to see me once again, for the last time on earth. Alas!  _That_ was the last time.  I had no letter, and I never saw him more.', 'I went, I went, when all was over, to the scene of his--I will use the term the world would freely use, for worldly harshness or favour are now alike to him--of his guilty love, resolved that if my fears were realised that erring child should find one heart and home to shelter and compassionate her.  The family had left that part a week before; they had called in such trifling debts as were outstanding, discharged them, and left the place by night.  Why, or whither, none can tell.', 'When your brother, s chair, ', 'What?', 'By me, I told you I should interest you before long.  I say by me--I see that your cunning associate suppressed my name, although for ought he knew, it would be quite strange to your ears.  When he was rescued by me, then, and lay recovering from sickness in my house, his strong resemblance to this picture I have spoken of, struck me with astonishment.  Even when I first saw him in all his dirt and misery, there was a lingering expression in his face that came upon me like a glimpse of some old friend flashing on one in a vivid dream.  I need not tell you he was snared away before I knew his history--', 'Why not?', 'Because you know it well.', 'I!', 'Denial to me is vain, I shall show you that I know more than that.', 'You--you--can  stammered Monks.  ', 'We shall see, I lost the boy, and no efforts of mine could recover him.  Your mother being dead, I knew that you alone could solve the mystery if anybody could, and as when I had last heard of you you were on your own estate in the West Indies--whither, as you well know, you retired upon your mother', 'And now you do see me, what then? Fraud and robbery are high-sounding words--justified, you think, by a fancied resemblance in some young imp to an idle daub of a dead man t even know that a child was born of this maudlin pair; you don', 'I _did not_, but within the last fortnight I have learnt it all.  You have a brother; you know it, and him.  There was a will, which your mother destroyed, leaving the secret and the gain to you at her own death.  It contained a reference to some child likely to be the result of this sad connection, which child was born, and accidentally encountered by you, when your suspicions were first awakened by his resemblance to your father.  You repaired to the place of his birth. There existed proofs--proofs long suppressed--of his birth and parentage.  Those proofs were destroyed by you, and now, in your own words to your accomplice the Jew, "_the only proofs of the boy s heart, and in whom all evil passions, vice, and profligacy, festered, till they found a vent in a hideous disease which had made your face an index even to your mind--you, Edward Leeford, do you still brave me!', 'No, no, no!', 'Every word! every word that has passed between you and this detested villain, is known to me.  Shadows on the wall have caught your whispers, and brought them to my ear; the sight of the persecuted child has turned vice itself, and given it the courage and almost the attributes of virtue. Murder has been done, to which you were morally if not really a party.', 'No, no, I--I knew nothing of that; I was going to inquire the truth of the story when you overtook me.  I didn', 'It was the partial disclosure of your secrets, Will you disclose the whole?', 'Will you disclose the whole?', 'Yes, I will.', 'Set your hand to a statement of truth and facts, and repeat it before witnesses?', 'That I promise too.', 'Remain quietly here, until such a document is drawn up, and proceed with me to such a place as I may deem most advisable, for the purpose of attesting it?', 'If you insist upon that, I', 'You must do more than that, Make restitution to an innocent and unoffending child, for such he is, although the offspring of a guilty and most miserable love.  You have not forgotten the provisions of the will.  Carry them into execution so far as your brother is concerned, and then go where you please.  In this world you need meet no more.', 'The man will be taken, He will be taken to-night!', 'The murderer?', 'Yes, yes, His dog has been seen lurking about some old haunt, and there seems little doubt that his master either is, or will be, there, under cover of the darkness.  Spies are hovering about in every direction.  I have spoken to the men who are charged with his capture, and they tell me he cannot escape.  A reward of a hundred pounds is proclaimed by Government to-night.', 'I will give fifty more, and proclaim it with my own lips upon the spot, if I can reach it.  Where is Mr. Maylie?', 'Harry?  As soon as he had seen your friend here, safe in a coach with you, he hurried off to where he heard this, and mounting his horse sallied forth to join the first party at some place in the outskirts agreed upon between them.', 'Fagin, what of him?', 'When I last heard, he had not been taken, but he will be, or is, by this time.  They', 'Have you made up your mind?', 'Yes, You--you--will be secret with me?', 'I will.  Remain here till I return.  It is your only hope of safety.', 'What have you done?', 'All that I could hope to do, and even more.  Coupling the poor girl s inquiries on the spot, I left him no loophole of escape, and laid bare the whole villainy which by these lights became plain as day. Write and appoint the evening after to-morrow, at seven, for the meeting.  We shall be down there, a few hours before, but shall require rest:  especially the young lady, who _may_ have greater need of firmness than either you or I can quite foresee just now.  But my blood boils to avenge this poor murdered creature.  Which way have they taken?', 'Drive straight to the office and you will be in time, I will remain here.', 'I wish, that you had picked out some other crib when the two old ones got too warm, and had not come here, my fine feller.', 'Why didn', 'Well, I thought you', 'Why, look  said Toby,  s rather a startling thing to have the honour of a wisit from a young gentleman (however respectable and pleasant a person he may be to play cards with at conweniency) circumstanced as you are.', 'Especially, when the exclusive young man has got a friend stopping with him, that', 'When was Fagin took then?', 'Just at dinner-time--two o', 'And Bet?', 'Poor Bet!  She went to see the Body, to speak to who it was, and went off mad, screaming and raving, and beating her head against the boards; so they put a strait-weskut on her and took her to the hospital--and there she is.', 'Wot', 'He hung about, not to come over here afore dark, but he  replied Chitling.   s nowhere else to go to now, for the people at the Cripples are all in custody, and the bar of the ken--I went up there and see it with my own eyes--is filled with traps.', 'This is a smash, There', 'The sessions are on, if they get the inquest over, and Bolter turns King s said already:  they can prove Fagin an accessory before the fact, and get the trial on on Friday, and he', 'You should have heard the people groan, the officers fought like devils, or they em now, not able to stand upright with the pressing of the mob, and draggin him along amongst  d tear his heart out!', 'What  said Toby when they had returned.  t be coming here.  I--I--hope not.', 'If he was coming here, he  said Kags, stooping down to examine the animal, who lay panting on the floor. ', 'Here!  Give us some water for him; he has run himself faint.', 'He  said Chitling after watching the dog some time in silence.  ', 'Where can he have come from! He s been many a time and often.  But where can he have come from first, and how comes he here alone without the other!', 'He He can', 'If he had, the dog  s got out of the country, and left the dog behind.  He must have given him the slip somehow, or he wouldn', 'Young Bates,', 'We must let him in,', 'Isn', 'None.  He _must_ come in.', 'Don', 'How came that dog here?', 'Alone.  Three hours ago.', 'To-night s took.  Is it true, or a lie?', 'True.', 'Damn you all!', 'Have you nothing to say to me?', 'You that keep this house, do you mean to sell me, or to let me lie here till this hunt is over?', 'do you mean to sell me, or to let me lie here till this hunt is over?', 'You may stop here, if you think it safe,', 'Why isn  he retorted with the same glance behind him.  s that knocking?', 'Toby, why didn', 'Let me go into some other room,', 'Charley! Don t you know me?', 'Don  answered the boy, still retreating, and looking, with horror in his eyes, upon the murderer You monster!', 'Witness you three, Witness you three--I ll give him up; I will. I tell you out at once.  He may kill me for it if he likes, or if he dares, but if I am here I d give him up if he was to be boiled alive.  Murder! Help!  If there ll help me.  Murder!  Help!  Down with him!', 'Help!', 'He', 'In the King', 'Break down the door! I tell you they', 'Open the door of some place where I can lock this screeching Hell-babe, That door.  Quick! Is the downstairs door fast?', 'Double-locked and chained,', 'The panels--are they strong?', 'Lined with sheet-iron.', 'And the windows too?', 'Yes, and the windows.', 'Damn you! Do your worst!  I', 'The tide, the tide was in as I came up. Give me a rope, a long rope.  They', 'They have him now, Hurrah!', 'I will give fifty pounds, to the man who takes him alive.  I will remain here, till he come to ask me for it.', 'The eyes again!', 'It was quite true, that they must know them before long, but it might be at a better time than the present, and it could not be at a worse.', 'See there, there! that', 'You will see him soon, You shall tell him how happy you are, and how rich you have grown, and that in all your happiness you have none so great as the coming back to make him happy too.', 'Yes, yes, and we ll take him away from here, and have him clothed and taught, and send him to some quiet country place where he may grow strong and well,--shall we?', 'You will be kind and good to him, for you are to every one, It will make you cry, I know, to hear what he can tell; but never mind, never mind, it will be all over, and you will smile again--I know that too--to think how changed he is; you did the same with me.  He said "God bless you" to me when I ran away, and I will say "God bless you" now, and show him how I love him for it!', 'This is a painful task, but these declarations, which have been signed in London before many gentlemen, must be in substance repeated here.  I would have spared you the degradation, but we must hear them from your own lips before we part, and you know why.', 'Go on, Quick.  I have almost done enough, I think.  Don', 'This child, is your half-brother; the illegitimate son of your father, my dear friend Edwin Leeford, by poor young Agnes Fleming, who died in giving him birth.', 'Yes, That is the bastard child.', 'The term you use, is a reproach to those long since passed beyond the feeble censure of the world. It reflects disgrace on no one living, except you who use it. Let that pass.  He was born in this town.', 'In the workhouse of this town, You have the story there.', 'I must have it here, too,', 'Listen then!  You! His father being taken ill at Rome, was joined by his wife, my mother, from whom he had been long separated, who went from Paris and took me with her--to look after his property, for what I know, for she had no great affection for him, nor he for her.  He knew nothing of us, for his senses were gone, and he slumbered on till next day, when he died.  Among the papers in his desk, were two, dated on the night his illness first came on, directed to yourself and enclosed in a few short lines to you, with an intimation on the cover of the package that it was not to be forwarded till after he was dead.  One of these papers was a letter to this girl Agnes; the other a will.', 'What of the letter?', 'The letter?--A sheet of paper crossed and crossed again, with a penitent confession, and prayers to God to help her.  He had palmed a tale on the girl that some secret mystery--to be explained one day--prevented his marrying her just then; and so she had gone on, trusting patiently to him, until she trusted too far, and lost what none could ever give her back.  She was, at that time, within a few months of her confinement.  He told her all he had meant to do, to hide her shame, if he had lived, and prayed her, if he died, not to curse his memory, or think the consequences of their sin would be visited on her or their young child; for all the guilt was his.  He reminded her of the day he had given her the little locket and the ring with her christian name engraved upon it, and a blank left for that which he hoped one day to have bestowed upon her--prayed her yet to keep it, and wear it next her heart, as she had done before--and then ran on, wildly, in the same words, over and over again, as if he had gone distracted.  I believe he had.', 'The will,', 'The will, was in the same spirit as the letter.  He talked of miseries which his wife had brought upon him; of the rebellious disposition, vice, malice, and premature bad passions of you his only son, who had been trained to hate him; and left you, and your mother, each an annuity of eight hundred pounds. The bulk of his property he divided into two equal portions--one for Agnes Fleming, and the other for their child, if it should be born alive, and ever come of age.  If it were a girl, it was to inherit the money unconditionally; but if a boy, only on the stipulation that in his minority he should never have stained his name with any public act of dishonour, meanness, cowardice, or wrong.  He did this, he said, to mark his confidence in the other, and his conviction--only strengthened by approaching death--that the child would share her gentle heart, and noble nature.  If he were disappointed in this expectation, then the money was to come to you:  for then, and not till then, when both children were equal, would he recognise your prior claim upon his purse, who had none upon his heart, but had, from an infant, repulsed him with coldness and aversion.', 'My mother, did what a woman should have done.  She burnt this will.  The letter never reached its destination; but that, and other proofs, she kept, in case they ever tried to lie away the blot.  The girl', 'Years after this, this man s--mother came to me.  He had left her, when only eighteen; robbed her of jewels and money; gambled, squandered, forged, and fled to London:  where for two years he had associated with the lowest outcasts.  She was sinking under a painful and incurable disease, and wished to recover him before she died.  Inquiries were set on foot, and strict searches made. They were unavailing for a long time, but ultimately successful; and he went back with her to France.', 'There she died, after a lingering illness; and, on her death-bed, she bequeathed these secrets to me, together with her unquenchable and deadly hatred of all whom they involved--though she need not have left me that, for I had inherited it long before.  She would not believe that the girl had destroyed herself, and the child too, but was filled with the impression that a male child had been born, and was alive.  I swore to her, if ever it crossed my path, to hunt it down; never to let it rest; to pursue it with the bitterest and most unrelenting animosity; to vent upon it the hatred that I deeply felt, and to spit upon the empty vaunt of that insulting will by draggin it, if I could, to the very gallows-foot.  She was right. He came in my way at last.  I began well; and, but for babbling drabs, I would have finished as I began!', 'The locket and ring?', 'I bought them from the man and woman I told you of, who stole them from the nurse, who stole them from the corpse, You know what became of them.', 'Do my hi  cried Mr. Bumble, with ill-feigned enthusiasm,  d how I', 'or is that little Oliver?  Oh O-li-ver, if you know ve been a-grieving for you--', 'Hold your tongue, fool,', 'Isn  remonstrated the workhouse master.  t I be supposed to feel--_I_ as brought him up porochially--when I see him a-setting here among ladies and gentlemen of the very affablest description!  I always loved that boy as if he  said Mr. Bumble, halting for an appropriate comparison. ', 'Can d been my--my--my own grandfather, Master Oliver, my dear, you remember the blessed gentleman in the white waistcoat?  Ah! he went to heaven last week, in a oak coffin with plated handles, Oliver.', 'Master Oliver, my dear, you remember the blessed gentleman in the white waistcoat?  Ah! he went to heaven last week, in a oak coffin with plated handles, Oliver.', 'Come, sir, suppress your feelings.', 'I will do my endeavours, sir, How do you do, sir?  I hope you are very well.', 'Do you know that person?', 'No,', 'Perhaps _you_ don', 'I never saw him in all my life,', 'Nor sold him anything, perhaps?', 'No,', 'You never had, perhaps, a certain gold locket and ring?', 'Certainly not, Why are we brought here to answer to such nonsense as this?', 'You shut the door the night old Sally died, but you couldn', 'No, no, No, no, no.', 'We heard her try to tell you what she s shop,', 'Yes, and it was a "locket and gold ring." We found out that, and saw it given you.  We were by.  Oh! we were by.', 'And we know more than that, for she told us often, long ago, that the young mother had told her that, feeling she should never get over it, she was on her way, at the time that she was taken ill, to die near the grave of the father of the child.', 'Would you like to see the pawnbroker himself?', 'No, if he--she pointed to Monks-- re where you', 'Nothing, except that it remains for us to take care that neither of you is employed in a situation of trust again. You may leave the room.', 'I hope, I hope that this unfortunate little circumstance will not deprive me of my porochial office?', 'Indeed it will, You may make up your mind to that, and think yourself well off besides.', 'It was all Mrs. Bumble.  She _would_ do it,', 'That is no excuse, You were present on the occasion of the destruction of these trinkets, and indeed are the more guilty of the two, in the eye of the law; for the law supposes that your wife acts under your direction.', 'If the law supposes that, the law is a ass--a idiot.  If that', 'Young lady, give me your hand. Do not tremble.  You need not fear to hear the few remaining words we have to say.', 'If they have--I do not know how they can, but if they have--any reference to me, pray let me hear them at some other time. I have not strength or spirits now.', 'Nay, you have more fortitude than this, I am sure.  Do you know this young lady, sir?', 'Yes,', 'I never saw you before,', 'I have seen you often,', 'The father of the unhappy Agnes had _two_ daughters, What was the fate of the other--the child?', 'The child, when her father died in a strange place, in a strange name, without a letter, book, or scrap of paper that yielded the faintest clue by which his friends or relatives could be traced--the child was taken by some wretched cottagers, who reared it as their own.', 'Go on, Go on!', 'You couldn  said Monks, ', 'She took it, did she?', 'No.  The people were poor and began to sicken--at least the man did--of their fine humanity; so she left it with them, giving them a small present of money which would not last long, and promised more, which she never meant to send.  She didn s unhappiness, but told the history of the sister', 'Do you see her now?', 'Yes.  Leaning on your arm.', 'But not the less my niece, not the less my dearest child.  I would not lose her now, for all the treasures of the world.  My sweet companion, my own dear girl!', 'The only friend I ever had, The kindest, best of friends.  My heart will burst.  I cannot bear all this.', 'You have borne more, and have been, through all, the best and gentlest creature that ever shed happiness on every one she knew, Come, come, my love, remember who this is who waits to clasp you in his arms, poor child!  See here--look, look, my dear!', 'Not aunt, I', 'I know it all, Dear Rose, I know it all.', 'I am not here by accident, nor have I heard all this to-night, for I knew it yesterday--only yesterday.  Do you guess that I have come to remind you of a promise?', 'Stay, You _do_ know all.', 'All.  You gave me leave, at any time within a year, to renew the subject of our last discourse.', 'I did.', 'Not to press you to alter your determination, but to hear you repeat it, if you would. I was to lay whatever of station or fortune I might possess at your feet, and if you still adhered to your former determination, I pledged myself, by no word or act, to seek to change it.', 'but to hear you repeat it, if you would. I was to lay whatever of station or fortune I might possess at your feet, and if you still adhered to your former determination, I pledged myself, by no word or act, to seek to change it.', 'The same reasons which influenced me then, will influence me now, If I ever owed a strict and rigid duty to her, whose goodness saved me from a life of indigence and suffering, when should I ever feel it, as I should to-night?  It is a struggle, but one I am proud to make; it is a pang, but one my heart shall bear.', 'The disclosure of to-night,', 'The disclosure of to-night, leaves me in the same position, with reference to you, as that in which I stood before.', 'You harden your heart against me, Rose,', 'Oh Harry, Harry, I wish I could, and spare myself this pain.', 'Then why inflict it on yourself? Think, dear Rose, think what you have heard to-night.', 'And what have I heard!  What have I heard! That a sense of his deep disgrace so worked upon my own father that he shunned all--there, we have said enough, Harry, we have said enough.', 'Not yet, not yet, My hopes, my wishes, prospects, feeling:  every thought in life except my love for you:  have undergone a change.  I offer you, now, no distinction among a bustling crowd; no mingling with a world of malice and detraction, where the blood is called into honest cheeks by aught but real disgrace and shame; but a home--a heart and home--yes, dearest Rose, and those, and those alone, are all I have to offer.', 'What do you mean!', 'I mean but this--that when I left you last, I left you with a firm determination to level all fancied barriers between yourself and me; resolved that if my world could not be yours, I would make yours mine; that no pride of birth should curl the lip at you, for I would turn from it.  This I have done.  Those who have shrunk from me because of this, have shrunk from you, and proved you so far right.  Such power and patronage:  such relatives of influence and rank:  as smiled upon me then, look coldly now; but there are smiling fields and waving trees in England', 'It', 'I had serious thoughts of eating my head to-night, for I began to think I should get nothing else.  I ll allow me, of saluting the bride that is to be.', 'for I began to think I should get nothing else.  I ll allow me, of saluting the bride that is to be.', 'Oliver, my child, where have you been, and why do you look so sad?  There are tears stealing down your face at this moment.  What is the matter?', 'Is the young gentleman to come too, sir? It', 'It is not indeed, my friend, but my business with this man is intimately connected with him; and as this child has seen him in the full career of his success and villainy, I think it as well--even at the cost of some pain and fear--that he should see him now.', 'This, this is the place he passes through.  If you step this way, you can see the door he goes out at.', 'Good boy, Charley--well done-- Oliver, too, ha! ha! ha! Oliver too--quite the gentleman now--quite the--take that boy away to bed!', 'Take him away to bed! Do you hear me, some of you?  He has been the--the--somehow the cause of all this.  It s throat, Bill; never mind the girl--Bolter', 'Fagin,', 'That  cried the Jew, falling instantly, into the attitude of listening he had assumed upon his trial.  ', 'Here, Here', 'I shan  he replied, looking up with a face retaining no human expression but rage and terror.  ', 'Steady, Now, sir, tell him what you want.  Quick, if you please, for he grows worse as the time gets on.', 'You have some papers, which were placed in your hands, for better security, by a man called Monks.', 'It  replied Fagin.   t one--not one.', 'For the love of God, do not say that now, upon the very verge of death; but tell me where they are.  You know that Sikes is dead; that Monks has confessed; that there is no hope of any further gain.  Where are those papers?', 'Oliver, Here, here! Let me whisper to you.', 'I am not afraid,', 'The papers, are in a canvas bag, in a hole a little way up the chimney in the top front-room.  I want to talk to you, my dear.  I want to talk to you.', 'Yes, yes, Let me say a prayer.  Do!  Let me say one prayer.  Say only one, upon your knees, with me, and we will talk till morning.', 'Outside, outside, Say I ll believe you.  You can get me out, if you take me so. Now then, now then!', 'Oh!  God forgive this wretched man!', 'That s right, That t you mind, but hurry on.  Now, now, now!', 'Have you nothing else to ask him, sir?', 'No other question, If I hoped we could recall him to a sense of his position--', 'Nothing will do that, sir, You had better leave him.', 'Press on, press on, Softly, but not so slow. Faster, faster!']